# The Nonbelief reading
---
There's a middle ground available between the epistemic accounts of the structure of rational evaluation and the non-propositional reading that we looked at previously.

Regarding our hinge commitments as visceral in the way that Wittgenstein demands, while inconsistent with regarding them as akin to normal beliefs, could be thought compatible with them being at least sometimes manifest in corresponding propositional attitudes.

Given our hinge commitments are ex hypothesi never the result of a rational process and are in their nature unresponsive to rational considerations, then they are not plausible candidates to be beliefs (the notion of beliefs in play, unless qualified, is knowledge-apt belief, the notion of belief at play which is a constituent part of knowledge).

Maybe there is a propositional attitude that we can take to our hinge commitments that is in sufficient respects belief-like. Beliefs, after all, are propositional attitudes that by their nature are responsive to rational considerations. This needn't mean that beliefs are by nature rational, as this is manifestly false. It's rather to say that there are certain minimal but constitutive connections between belief and truth such that a propositional attitude that didn't satisfy them simply wouldn't count as a belief but would be a different propositional attitude entirely.

It makes no sense for there to be an agent who believes that p while taking herself to have no reason whatsoever for thinking p to be true. A fortiori, it does not make sense for an agent to believe that p while taking herself to have overwhelming reasons for thinking p is false.

In such cases the propositional attitude in question would not be a belief but a different propositional attitude entirely, such as wishful thinking. But since Hinge's are never the result of rational processes nor responsive to rational processes, then we are obliged to reject the idea that we could have hinge beliefs.

Call this the *nonbelief* reading. Such a reading precludes the possibility that we can have knowledge, much less rationally grounded knowledge, when it comes to our hinge commitments. If we are not even in the market for belief then we are a fortiori not in the market for knowledge or rationally grounded knowledge.

Unlike the nonpropositional reading, this proposal doesn't demand that we should think of our hinge commitments in inherently nonpropositional terms.

One might be puzzled how this helps. Insofar as one can conceive of one's hinge commitments in terms of a propositional attitude, why doesn't that simply exacerbate the closure problem? Notice, however, how the relevant closure principle is formulated, in particular the main closure principle of interest to us regarding rationally supported knowledge.

It is a key principle that it is describing the *acquisition* of a knowledge-apt belief via the *rational process* of competent deduction. These aren't incidental features of this principle, since without these elements it would not capture the point that a rational process like competent deduction from rationally supported knowledge cannot lead one to form a belief in the entailed proposition that does not amount to rationally grounded knowledge.

It follows that the proponent of the nonbelief reading can argue that they do not face the closure problem for the simple reason that one can never, via the kind of competent deduction at issue in the relevant closure principles, come to acquire a belief in a hinge commitment.

Then it follows that there is no tension between the unknowability of hinge propositions and the closure principle, in that the unknowability of hinge propositions is consistent with the closure principle.

Of course, the proponent of the nonpropositional reading can make the point about the compatibility of their view with the closure principle, but the nonpropositional reading faces the further mystery of accounting for the apparent propositional attitude that is generated by such competent deductions.

In contrast the nonbelief reading can grant that someone who undertakes the relevant competent deductions could be described as having as propositional attitude toward the entailed hinge commitment without having to face the question of why this propositional attitude doesn't amount to knowledge.

It's compatible with the nonbelief reading that an agent who undertakes the relevant closure-based competent deduction ends up adopting a propositional attitude of some sort toward the entailed hinge proposition. 

Thinking you believe something does not entail you do believe it in the knowledge-apt sense, and endorsing a proposition, you recognize that you are some sense committed to its truth does not entail belief either.

There's a very natural objection to the nonbelief reading. This is to argue that there must surely be a closure-type principle in the vicinity that can be utilized to resurrect the closure problem, such that even if one cannot generate this problem by appeal to the closure principle, the underlying difficulty is not evaded. The worry is that this is little more than a subtle trick. The intuition underlying closure-style principles has been fleshed out in a very specific fashion and surprisingly that way of formulating this intuition as a principle is entirely compatible with the non-belief reading.

It's not a trick, any development of this critical response to the nonbelief proposal would involve weakening the epistemic standing at issue in the closure principle with regard to the subject's belief in the consequent proposition. For example, instead of rationally grounded knowledge in the consequent proposition, how about the competent deduction in play merely putting one in a position to acquire such knowledge.

Such a closure principle would be weaker than the closure_rk principle in that one could satisfy its antecedent even while not actually having rationally grounded knowledge of the entailed proposition. With this reading, we can reinstate our closure problem for the nonbelief reading.  In taking the competent deduction she has at least the potential to acquire such knowledge, such a claim is still in conflict with the idea that propositions are not in the market for knowledge.

Now we have a concrete proposal in play, however the weakness in this line becomes obvious. However we spell out the difference between rationally grounded knowledge and merely being in the position to gain such knowledge, the point just raised about our hinge commitments cannot be thought of as beliefs would gain a purchase.

Blah blah blah.

It ought to be clear that the difficulty in play here is not one of formulation. Either we have a formulation of a closure-style principle that demands rationally grounded knowledge, or the potential for rationally grounded knowledge in the entailed proposition, or we have a formulation that doesn't demand this. On the former reading the principle will not be compatible with our hinge commitments, on the latter reading it will not capture the intuition that the target closure-style principle trades on. In either case, the principle won't be in conflict with the non-belief reading.

# Hinge Commitments
---
On the surface, Wittgenstein's remarks on hinge propositions would seem to suggest that there is a great deal of variability in each person's hinge commitments, with these commitments changing as we move from person to person, culture to culture, epoch to epoch, and so on.

Wittgenstein writes, for example, about hinges concerning the fact that one has never been to the moon, or that one's name is such and such. But in each case the "hinge" in question seems very relative to the particular circumstances of the person in question. For example, someone in the future might not have a hinge commitment that she had never been tot he moon, and someone with a different name will presumably take it as a hinge commitment that her particular name is the name she thinks.

The foregoing suggests a highly context-sensitive account of hinge commitments, and one might be tempted on this basis to regard one's hinge commitments as being entirely context-bound. This would be mistake, for the apparently heterogeneous class of hinge commitments reveals that they all in effect codify the entirely general hinge commitment that one is not radically and fundamentally mistaken in one's beliefs. Call this commitment the *uber hinge commitment*, and call the proposition endorsed by the uber hinge commitment the *uber hinge proposition*.

If one were to completely mistaken about one's name, for example, then this would almost certainly mean that one's beliefs are radically and fundamentally in error. Imagine that you go out into the world one morning and find that everyone you know is calling you by an unfamiliar name and telling you that you have had this name all along and everything you call upon to back up your story, in fact supports the opposing story. Although this commitment of yours is quite specific, its apparent falsity reveals a radical and fundamental error in your beliefs. The particular hinge commitment to this proposition is thus simply a reflection of the fact that, in your particular circumstances, to be wrong about something like this would reflect radical and fundamental error. This particular hinge commitment is just a consequence of your more general uber hinge commitment that you are not radically and fundamentally mistaken.

The importance of this observation is that it highlights that we shouldn't invest too much importance in the fact that people from different cultures, ages, and so forth have different overall hinge commitments, since these differences merely reflect the way in which different people will codify the uber hinge commitment.

So we distinguish between the uber hinge commitment that everyone holds, and the different ways in which this uber hinge commitment manifests itself in hinge commitments to specific propositions when it comes to particular people. Call these latter commitments *personal hinge commitments* and call the propositions endorsed by personal hinge commitments the *personal hinge propositions*.

One advantage of thinking about hinge commitments this way is that it explains how they can change over time,  it would be puzzling if we thought that even these personal hinge commitments were on par with the uber hinge commitments. The latter is clearly something that can't change over time, since to lose this commitment is to have no hinge commitments at all, and yet the former hinge commitments clearly can change over time.

Once we see they're simply codifying the uber hinge commitment then there is no puzzle here. As one's personal circumstances change, so one's beliefs change with them and hence something that used to codify one's uber hinge commitment now no longer plays this role.

A further advantage of this way of thinking is it demystifies our hinge commitments. If they were a heterogeneous class, with no common core, then they would be very mysterious. By recognizing they have a common core, the mystery evaporates. Also notice that in the process we gain a way of distinguishing between a hinge commitment and a proposition about which we are merely very certain. There may, after all, be propositions that we find ourselves highly committed to, perhaps for pathological reasons, but that don't codify our uber hinge commitment. 

If the only hallmark of a hinge commitment is the level of certainty involves, then these commitments would thereby qualify as hinge commitments. But that is surely not what we want to say about these particular certainties. By insisting that genuine hinge commitments codify the uber hinge commitment, we have a way of excluding these certainties from the class of hinge commitments.

This way of thinking about Wittgenstein's account of hinge propositions also accords with a key metaphor that he uses to describe our hinge commitments. Consider the passages:

> It might be imagined that some propositions, of the form of empirical propositions, were hardened and functioned as channels for such empirical propositions as were not hardened but fluid; and that this relation altered with time, in that fluid propositions hardened, and hard ones became fluid.
> 
> The mythology may change back into a state of flux, the river-bed of thoughts may shift. But I distinguish between the movement of the waters on the river-bed and the shift of the bed itself; though there is not a sharp division of the one from the other.…
> 
> And the bank of that river consists partly of hard rock, subject to no alteration or to only an imperceptible one, partly of sand, which now in one place now in another gets washed away, or deposited. (OC, §§96–99)

The idea is that such hinge commitments may change over time, these changes are entirely at the periphery and the rate of change is inevitably slow.

There is a third category of hinge commitments that we need to demonstrate, between personal hinge commitments and uber hinge commitments, which concerns our attitude to radical skeptical scenarios.

Call these *anti-skeptical hinge commitments*, and call the propositions endorsed by the anti-skeptical hinge commitments the *anti-skeptical propositional* In virtue of having the uber hinge commitments one is thereby committed to regarding these scenarios as false. But these explicitly anti-skeptical hinge commitments are unlike personal hinge commitments in that most people, prior to being introduced to skeptical scenarios anyways, will have no particular view about them. But they are also unlike the uber hinge commitment in that they are quite specific about the nature of the error in question.

I think we can explain what's going on here by noting that such scenarios are explicitly designed to call the uber hinge commitment into question. Accordingly, such skeptical scenarios are simply very different ways in which we could be radically and fundamentally in error, and hence our commitment to their denial is an immediate consequence of our commitment to the uber hinge proposition.

By focusing on the uber hinge commitment we see why rational evaluation must be essentially local. For what possible reason could we have for holding the uber hinge commitment? Whatever grounds we cite would already presuppose the truth of this commitment after all. Moreover, once we see that the other hinge commitments are simply a consequence of our uber hinge commitment, then it becomes clear that the extent to which our system of rational support presupposes essentially groundless commitments is quite considerable.

Notice that this way of thinking about our hinge commitments underlines Wittgenstein's point that there is nothing contingent about the limitation on rational evaluation that the existence of our hinge commitments reveals. Since we are unable to have rationally supported belief in the uber hinge proposition, it follows that we are unable to have rationally supported beliefs in the personal and anti-skeptical hinge propositions that codify our uber hinge commitment.

We thus get the Wittgensteinian conclusion: Since all rational evaluation necessarily takes place relative to groundless hinge commitments, the very idea of a fully general rational evaluation, that is one that does not presuppose any hinge commitments, is incoherent, whether that evaluation is positive or negative. The universality of rational evaluation thesis is thus rejected.

With this threefold taxonomy of hinge commitments, we are in a better position to understand certain elements of the nonbelief reading.

Notice there isn't any closure-style inference in which the entailment is the uber hinge proposition. This is because there isn't any particular proposition that I have rationally grounded knowledge of that entails that I am not radically and fundamentally mistaken in my beliefs. This is because any particular propositions is consistent with being radically and fundamentally in error in ones belief, just not about the particular proposition.

There are closure-style principles in the vicinity that would license such an inference, but they are independently implausible. For example  a closure style inference between the subjects knowledge of the antecedent proposition and the consequence proposition. Such a closure principle would lead to iterativity for rationally grounded knowledge, such that if you know p, you know that you know that p, and so on.

That iterativity applies to rationally grounded knowledge is controversial, so we should be wary of any formulation of a closure-style principle that entails it.

One can also appeal to a multi-premise closure-style principle. However there are generally acknowledged to be less compelling than their single-premise counterparts, so this would be again to appeal to closure-style reasoning that is some philosophical distance from the specific kind of closure-style reasoning we want to try to preserve at all costs.

There are also grounds to be suspicious of such reasoning according to Wittgensteinian account of the structure of rational evaluation. Notice that at most one could use such reasoning to aggregate one's rational support for the propositions that one knows. If Wittgenstein is right, however, then our core commitments are not in the market for knowledge and belief. Thus, there will be inherent limits on the extent that such an aggregation could take, since it couldn't cover one's commitments more generally.

So there is no uncontentious deductive route, via a closure-style principle, from our rationally grounded knowledge of particular propositions to rationally grounded knowledge of the uber hinge proposition. It's also far form clear that there are plausible instances of the closure_rk principle where the entailed proposition concerns a personal hinge proposition.

In contrast, the denials of radical skeptical hypotheses are clearly entailed by lots of our everyday nonhinge beliefs. What kind of propositional attitude towards the entailed proposition do we have, if not belief?

What is the propositional attitude in play as regards the anti-skeptical hinge commitment in such cases if its not one of belief?

It is certainly a propositional attitude akin to belief in at least one important respect, in that it involves a commitment to the target proposition that is incompatible with an attitude of agnosticism about its truth.

The commitment may feel like belief to the person concerned, in that its phenomenology may be identical to other, more mundane, beliefs that the subject holds. 

And so we once we understand why closure_rk style inferences can at most result in a commitment of this sort, we thereby understand why it can appear as if rationally grounded knowledge is not preserved across competent deductions.

For the propositional attitude that results from such deductions in these, while superficially similar to belief, cannot be a genuine knowledge-apt believing, but is instead a mere codification of the prior uber hinge commitment.

On the nonbelief reading we can reject the universality of rational evaluation thesis even while endorsing the closure_rk principle. There are in principle constrains on rational evaluation, contra the universality of rational evaluation thesis. In particular, the kind of wholesale rational evaluation that is attempted when one considers the rational status of one's hinge commitments is simply incoherent. Rather, rational evaluation is an essentially local activity, one that takes place relative to arational hinge commitments.

Such a claim is not in tension with the idea that rationally grounded knowledge is preserved across competent deductions, at least so long as we take seriously the idea that one simply could not forma  belief in one of one's hinge commitments, much left from such a belief as a result of undertaking the kind of rational process at issue in closure_rk-based inferences. Such inferences are thus never applicable to one's hinge commitments.

# Anti-skeptical Contrasts (I): Inferential Contextualism
---
An influential epistemic proposal directly inspired by Wittgenstein's account of the structure of rational evaluation is due to Michael Williams.

Williams describes his view as a form of epistemic contextualism, we'll refer to it as *inferential contextualism* to keep it distinct from attributer contextualism. Let's start with the commonalities.

Williams accepts the general Wittgenstenian point that all rational evaluation takes place relative to arational hinge commitments. In his words, he rejects the "totality condition" that is implicit in the traditional epistemological enterprise,, such that it is possible to rationally evaluate all our beliefs at once, and he does so because he believes all rational evaluation takes place relative to "methodological necessities" that are not themselves subject to rational evaluation.

Thus the idea of a fully general rational evaluation is incoherent and as a consequence radical skepticism is not the paradox that it purports to be, but rather trades on dubious theoretical claims masquerading as common sense.

A source of divergence between non-belief hinge epistemology and inferential contextualism comes with Williams's rejection of a metaphysical claim about the objects of epistemological study, which he refers to as *epistemological realism*. This is the view that a proposition can have an inherent epistemic status in virtue of its content.

Williams is especially interested in the idea, which he refers to as *epistemic priority* that propositions concerning the "inner" realm of one's own mind have a privileged epistemic status relative to propositions concerning the "outer" realm of an empirical world.

Whether or not claims about the inner realm are epistemologically basic (as in there are no beliefs that are prior), they are typically thought to be epistemologically prior to claims about the outer realm in this sense: the rational basis for an instance of the latter kind of claim must involve and inference from an instance of the former kind of claim.

For example, rationally grounded knowledge that there is a chair in front of one must be based on an inference from one's beliefs about one's mental states, particularly regarding one's experiences about there being a chair.

Williams rejects epistemic priority. For Williams, what can be legitimately inferred is relative to what is determined by the methodological necessities in play, and these vary from context to context.

So there may be contexts in which one can rationally infer external world claims from propositions regarding one's mental states, there is no necessity in play here for there can be other contexts, no less legitimate, in which one can reasonably infer claims about one's mental states from claims regarding the external world.

William wants to reject not just epistemic priority but also the more general thesis of epistemic realism. That is, there isn't a kind of inherent epistemic status simpliciter. For Williams, inferential contextualism is just the denial of epistemological realism.

We should note that while the rejection of the totality condition on rational evaluation does follow from Wittgenstein's account, the same is not true of the rejection of epistemological realism.

Maybe all rational evaluation is essentially local but that within this constraint there are nonetheless invariant (i.e. context independent) epistemic categories.

A more significant divergence between our Wittgensteinian proposal and inferential contextualism is the different way in which William conceives of hinge commitments as "methodological necessities". Our reading has all hinge commitments codify a general uber hinge commitment. So while there will be lots of divergence in a subject's hinge commitment as we move from person to person and culture to culture, there will also be a great deal of commonality. Minimally there will be commonality regarding the overarching uber hinge commitment.

Williams's conception of hinge propositions as methodological necessities is very different. Williams regards methodological necessities as being dependent on the kind of inquiry one is engaging ins. Consider the methodological necessities in play when we are conducting a historical inquiry. It will include claims about the reality of the past and about the reliability of documentary evidence, where these claims are not methodological necessities of some other kinds of inquiry. Hence, a change in one's inquiries can lead to a change in one's methodological necessities, and thus one's hinge commitments.

We can also ask what sort of inquiry would lack any of the methodological necessities that Williams claims is distinctive of history. When one reflects on the matter it's hard to think of a specific inquiry that doesn't presuppose the reality of the past. (Philosophical inquiry seems to be a possible response imo).

William offers as an example of an investigation which lacks the methodological necessities involved in doing history, traditional epistemological enterprise, by this he means the kind of fully general rational evaluation of our epistemic standing that is undertaken by the radical skeptical and the conventional anti-skeptic. A key part of Williams's diagnosis of radical skepticism is the observation that there is a sense in which skepticism is correct, albeit not as an acontextual thesis, but one relative to a particular set of methodological necessities. William argues that a hinge commitment to epistemological realism underlies traditional epistemology, and hence underlies the skeptical challenge too, such that it is only relative to this ungrounded methodologically necessity that skeptical inquiry can take place.

So not only are methodological necessities relative to contexts more generally, but there is a specific context in which skepticism itself is legitimate. 

While this is similar to the attributer contextualist there is a noticeable difference. The attributer contextualist appeals to the idea that the context in which radical skepticism is presented involves higher epistemic standards with regards to knowledge ascriptions. However for Williams, contexts are not ordered in terms of a hierarchy of epistemic standards. Rather each context incorporates its own internal epistemic standards as determined by the methodological necessities and hence inferential structure in play.

Since all epistemic evaluation is relative to some context, on Williams's view there is simply no sense in the idea that we can rank contexts in terms of how epistemically demanding they are, as the attributer contextualist supposes.

There is something suspect about this sort of contextualism. There are obviously no rational constraints on what can count as a methodological necessity, since they are by their nature immune to rational evaluation, even on Williams's view the methodological necessities must be true if that context is to yield rationally grounded knowledge.

The final point of contrast between inferential contextualism and our Wittgensteinian proposal, which is that Williams's view seems completely unable to resist *epistemic relativism*. Here's what is in mind is the possibility of a specifically epistemic incommensurabiltiy, such that two agents have completely different hinge commitments and hence enjoy two completely distinct systems of rational evaluation. 

The upshot is that when these two systems come into conflict, both agents could form their conflicting beliefs rationally and there is no way, even in principle, to rationally resolve their dispute.

Far from being an undesirable possibility that Williams wishes to avoid, epistemic relativism seems instead to be a straightforward *consequence* of inferential contextualism as he understands this view.

Here we have a straightforward endorsement of what we are here calling epistemic incommensurabiltiy, and hence epistemic relativism. Note  that epistemic relativism is not a direct consequence of the Wittgensteinian account of the structure of rational evaluation. That all rational evaluation takes place relative to hinge commitments is entirely compatible with there being a great deal of overlap in  subjects' hinge commitments, even when they are from very different cultures.

So the question we need to ask is whether there can be radical divergence in one's hinge commitments. Inferential contextualism seems committed to allowing this, at least to the extent that we can make sense of this proposal as a contextualist thesis at all, insofar as we reject inferential contextualism, then the way is at least open to denying the possibility.

Wittgenstein suggests what seems to be a limit to the extent to which there can be divergence of hinge commitments. He suggests a divergence of hinge commitments that was too great would be incompatible with one's thoughts even being intelligible.

If that's right, then we can at least count on a dispute between two agents who are intelligible to one another as involved a shared background of beliefs, and hence as having shared hinge commitments. There is thus no inherent reason why epistemic incommensurability should be possible on this view.

While there will be the usual practical problems associated with resolving entrenched disagreements, it seems we can avoid the in principle problems posed by epistemic incommensurability, which lead to epistemic relativism. We'll return to the issue of there being an intelligibility constraint on divergence of hinge commitments below when we consider Donald Davidson's anti-skepticism,

# Anti-skeptical Contrasts (II): Strawsonian Naturalism
---
According to Strawson, the anti-skeptical moral of *On Certainty* is to recognize that skeptical doubts should be neglected in virtue of the Humean, naturalist fact that we are psychologically incapable of taking such doubts seriously.

> They \[i.e., skeptical doubts] are to be neglected because they are idle; powerless against the force of nature, of our naturally implanted disposition to belief.

Strawson's point is that once we recognize that our anti-skeptical commitments are Humean in this very specific sense, such that we simply unable to properly entertain skeptical commitments, so we realize that the problem of radical skepticism can be legitimately ignored.

The Strawsonian naturalist or "Humean" reading of *On Certainty* has some support in the text. Wittgenstein notes in a Humean spirit, "It is always by favor of Nature that one knows something". But by itself the anti-skeptical point seems somewhat blunt.

How is one to gain an intellectually satisfying resolution of the philosophical project of engaging with radical skepticism by discovering that genuine anti-skeptical doubt is psychologically impossible and so in this sense idle. We are faced with a putative paradox here: wouldn't this simply *accentuate* one's philosophical anxiety rather than relieve it?

This leads to an important point, while Strawson's naturalistic reading of *On Certainty* has at least one key feature in common with our anti-skeptical proposal in that both views hold that our hinge commitments are not optional features of our doxastic architecture, they are at a deeper level very different. While the Wittgensteinian response to radical skepticism outlined does note the psychological compulsion of anti-skeptical commitments, it does not rest its case against radical skepticism on this point.

Indeed this point isn't load-bearing at all when it comes to the Wittgensteinian response to radical skepticism. Instead a principled basis is offered via the Wittgensteinian account of the structure of rational evaluation for treating the putative skeptical paradox as being not a genuine paradox at all but rather the product of dubious philosophical theory. It is this claim that bears the anti-skeptical weight, the contention that radical skeptical doubts are psychologically implausible is a mere dialectical stepping stone on the path towards this philosophical conclusion.

Strawson's approach is effectively an overriding anti-skeptical strategy, in that it leaves the paradox entirely intact. Strawson's observation that skeptical doubt is psychologically unrealizable does nothing to undermine the intuitive force of the claims that make up the skeptical paradox. Instead, Strawson is offering us an independent theoretical basis for not engaging with the skeptical paradox, on the grounds that whatever our stance on the skeptical problem we will continue to form our anti-skeptical beliefs regardless.

# Anti-skeptical Contrasts (III): Davidsonian Context Externalism
---
Davidson argues that from any plausible view about the nature of semantic content that we can make no sense of the idea that there could be a believer who has mostly false beliefs. As Davidson famously put it, we are entitled to hold that "belief is in its nature veridical".

As we saw earlier, Wittgenstein was keen to emphasize that belief presupposes certainty, to the extent that widespread doubt is simply incompatible with belief of any kind.  Wittgenstein also emphasized semantic limitations on the potential divergence of our hinge commitments. One could thus see Wittgenstein as arguing for the same sort of anti-skeptical conclusion as Davidson.

While they seem similar, the underlying style of anti-skepticism at play is very different. Davidson's anti-skepticism is both in one way significantly weaker and in another way significantly stronger than the non-belief reading.

It's weaker in that Davidson's anti-skepticism makes no mention of the epistemic standing of our beliefs. Widespread truth in one's beliefs is compatible with a widespread lack of knowledge as Davidson freely admits. Even though an agent beliefs may be mostly true it doesn't follow that they're all justified enough or in the right way to constitute knowledge.

In contrast, the account of the structure of rational evaluation that Wittgenstein offers is meant to be such that, insofar as our beliefs are broadly true in the manner that we suppose, then in virtue of the kind of localized rational support that Wittgenstein delineates we do have bona fide rationally grounded knowledge.

Davidson's anti-skepticism is in another way significantly stronger, in that our non-belief reading does *not* hold that one's beliefs cannot be both massively false and yet be bona fide knowledge-apt beliefs. Wittgenstein takes issue with the idea that skeptical doubt could be consistent with belief, but that point is compatible with one's beliefs being nonetheless massively false. For Wittgenstein there is a tension between genuinely entertaining skeptical doubt and having beliefs, but that in itself doesn't entail that one's beliefs could not be massively false.

This highlights the point that the nonbelief reading offered here is not allied to any specific conception of the nature of semantic content. Davidson argues for the stronger conclusion on this score precisely because he holds on independent content externalist grounds that we can make no sense of an agent having mostly false beliefs. Davidson may be correct on this and then we might wish to supplement our account of Wittgenstein's response to radical skepticism with this claim, however Wittgenstein's response to radical skepticism does not require this claim in order to achieve its ends. This makes it more plausible as a philosophical proposal, since it ensures that it not hostage to the truth of further contentious philosophical theses.

# Wittgensteinian Anti-skepticism and Underdetermination-Based Radical Skepticism
---
Wittgenstein presents us with an undercutting response to the problem of skepticism, one that when cast in a particular way offers us a compelling treatment of the problem. We can not rest content with this remedy however.

While Wittgenstein's account of the structure of rational evaluation offers us an innovative way of responding to closure-based formulations of the skeptical problem, it barely touches the underdetermination based aspect of the skeptical problem.

It gives one grounds to reject the universality of rational evaluation thesis that underlies the closure-based skeptical problem, without thereby requiring one to give up on the highly compelling closure principle for knowledge so long as we properly characterize the nature of our hinge commitments.

It doesn't tell us very much about the underdetermination problem and hence the insularity of reasons thesis. That all rational evaluation is essentially local is entirely compatible with it also being "insular" in the manner set out earlier. Such that the rational support one's everyday beliefs enjoys is compatible with hose beliefs being radically in error. Rational support could be both local and insular.

One might respond by arguing that Wittgenstein's account has at least indirect relevance to the problem as the view rules skeptical scenarios out of the epistemic courts, in virtue of the fact that their denials aren't in the market for knowledge.

If that's right, then while there's nothing in Wittgenstein's proposal that would suffice to show that we have the relevant favoring rational support for our beliefs, nonetheless there is enough to make the putative negative epistemic import of skeptical scenarios suspect.

While it's true that closure based skepticism and underdetermination based radical skepticism both appeal to radical skeptical hypotheses, we need to bear in mind that the manner in which they appeal to them is very different. The closure-based skeptical argument demands we must be able to have rationally grounded knowledge of the denials of radical skeptical hypotheses if we are to have widespread rationally grounded knowledge of everyday propositions. The Wittgensteinian proposal deals with this by showing that our everyday rationally grounded knowledge is compatible with a failure to have rationally grounded knowledge of the denials of skeptical hypotheses.

[[Radical Skepticism and Underdetermination|Underdetermination based skepticism]] doesn't demand we have rationally grounded knowledge of the denials of skeptical hypotheses at all. It demands that we must have better rational support for our beliefs over skeptical alternatives if we are to have widespread rationally grounded knowledge of everyday propositions.

The Wittgensteinian proposal is that our everyday knowledge is fine even despite our inability to have rationally grounded knowledge of the denials of radical skeptical hypotheses. But this is irrelevant to underdetermination-based radical skepticism on account of the fact that this form of skepticism never demanded that we should have this kind of anti-skeptical knowledge if we are to have everyday rationally grounded knowledge.

# Epistemic Priority and Underdetermination-Based Radical Skepticism
---
When looking at inferential contextualism we noted that there seemed to be a logical gap between the Wittgensteinian rejection of the universality of rational evaluation and the epistemic realism, and with it, epistemic priority, needs to be abandoned. There seems to be no inherent reason why rational support couldn't be both essentially local and yet there also be invariant epistemic categories, such as the kind of epistemic categories that demand epistemic priority.

Williams does not distinguish between closure-based and underdetermination-based formulations of the radical skeptical paradox, and hence he runs these two problems together. So he seeks a version of the Wittgensteinian claim that can deal with both kinds of skepticism simultaneously. This is a hopeless endeavor once we realize they trade on different underlying theses.

That's consistent with the idea that if we only added a rejection of epistemological realism the Wittgensteinian account can deal with both formulations. If this were right, then Williams could at least salvage something from this strategy. Sadly, that's not clear.