# The Descriptive Theory of Meaning and Its problems
---
One may think the most "natural" conception of "meaning", identifies "meaning" with *naming*. The meaning of an expression is hat the expression *refers to*. Meaning establishes *correspondence* between expressions in a *language* and things in the (model of the) *world*.

For simple expressions, this view of meaning is natural and simple. The meaning of a proper name "John" or definite description like "the number of major planets" is the object or number denoted by it, the meaning simple declarative is the fact they refer to.

Beyond here, things are less natural. What should be the things out in the world that common nouns and negated sentences be about? This referential, or *Millian*, theory of meaning gives rise to a serious empirical issue: the *substitution problem*.

Assuming, by the principle of compositionality, that the meaning of a complex sentence depends only on the meanings of its part and the way these parts are put together, it follows that if two expressions have the same meaning, one can substitute the one expression for the other in a complex sentence without changing the meaning.

There are 8 major planets in our solar system, so on the theory of meaning at hand the expression '8' and 'the number of major planets' refer to the same thing and thus have the same meaning. However, we cannot substitute the expression 'the number of major planets' for the number 8 in the sentence 'it is necessary that 8 is bigger than 7' without changing the truth value.

Frege concludes from this that the meaning of an expression should not be identified with the *reference*, or denotation, of that expression. Instead, the meaning of "the number of major planets" is the description itself, and the meaning of a noun or name is given by the set of properties associated with the expression that give necessary and sufficient conditions for objects or stuff to be in its denotation. The substitution puzzle does not arise on such a view.

This cluster theory of reference gives rise to at least two problems, one conceptual and one empirical in nature.

The **first conceptual problem** concerns the predicates, or properties, used in the description that is supposed to identify the referent. What is the meaning of those predicates? The standard theory of meaning doesn't seem to do more than explaining the meaning of one part of the language in terms of other parts, the predicates in terms of which the descriptions are given. One proposal to solve this problem would be that we indeed have a set of 'basic predicates', e.g. the predicates that refer to *natural kinds*. But how does this reference com about, if not via description?

A possible way out of the above regress problem is to propose to study meaning in terms of outward and observable correlates of language behavior. Perhaps motivated by such concerns, Wittgenstein proposed we should study the meaning of expressions in terms of their use, and the logical positivists proposed their verificationalist analysis of meaning because they considered the way to verify a sentence as a particularly good way to get clear how a certain is used. Their reductive analysis of meaning failed, in part because its difficult, if not impossible, to interpret the terms of a language individually. To determine the meanings of expressions we have to look simultaneously at a whole group of expressions of the language as a whole. A way to cash out such a *holistic* theory of meaning would be to claim that the terms refer to whatever things, properties, and relations that do the best job of making the set of sentences true that speakers in fact consider to be true. Unfortunately, generalizing Quine's well-known argument for the indeterminacy of reference, Putnam showed that this picture as such is not constrained enough to fix the meaning of the expressions of a language in the intuitively correct way. Even if one knows the truth value of a sentence in every possible circumstance, that doesn't necessarily mean that one knows the intuitively correct meaning of its constituents. It's possible to formulate highly counterintuitive meanings for expressions like *cat* and *mat*, so that in the actual world they refer to trees and cherries, without affecting the meaning of *The cat is on the mat*. To determine the meaning of the terms of our language, knowing the truth value or meaning of a collection of sentences is not enough, because the term of the language can be assigned weird and 'unintended' interpretations.

The **second problem** for the description theory of reference is **empirical** in nature. Donnellan and Kripke have argued that this theory leads to counter-intuitive results for proper names. Speakers can refer and can even intend to refer to particular individuals without being able to describe or identify those individuals. Ordinary people can, for instance, us the name *Feynman* to denote the physicist Feynman even though they have no uniquely identifying set of descriptions in mind. Kripke argues that uniquely fitting some set of descriptions that the speaker associates with a proper name is not a sufficient condition for its successful use either. Kriple and Putnam have similarly argued that the set of properties that speakers or agents associate with *natural kind terms* should also not be equated with the meaning of the noun. This is made clear by the "Twin Earth" stories given by Putnam. In Twin Earth the stuff the inhabitants of the counterfactual situation call *water* is superficially the same stuff *we* call *water*, but its chemical structure is not H20 but XYZ. If both earthling and his twin assert "Water is the best drink for quenching thirst" intuitively they've said something different. But that cannot be if they associate exactly the same description with the word and if speaker's description determines reference.

# The Causal Theory of Reference, and Context-Dependence
---
According to Kripke, Putnam, etc the meaning of at least proper names and natural kind terms is simply what they refer to. But this gives rise to the question of *why* these expressions have the references they in fact have. Kripke proposes his causal theory of reference. The proper name "N" can only refer to *a* only if and because *a* is the entity that is the *source* of the reference-preserving link from the initial baptism of the expression to the speaker's use of the name. This causal 'theory' of reference is in accordance with a naturalist philosophy and seems also the natural candidate to limit the possible interpretations of the expressions of 'our' language to solve Putnam's paradox.

This account is not without problems. It is unclear how a causal theory could determine the meaning of functional words or of prepositions like 'in'. It's also not clear how to cash out the causal account in a completely naturalistic way and there are problems of how to account for our intuitions that we can have false beliefs. One way to solve both of these problems involves making use of "normality conditions". But in order for the resulting analysis to be wholly naturalistic, we need a naturalistic analysis of such conditions. A natural candidate that suggests to provide such an analysis is Millikan's bio-semantics, but its controversial whether this theory can do the full job. The main problem of the causal theory is the original substitution problem: if the meanings of 'Hesperus' and 'Phosphorus' are just their referents 'Hesperus is Phosporus' is predicted to express the necessary true proposition. But how can we account for the fact that agents can seriously doubt that such statements are true?

What is expressed by a sentence is *context-dependent*: in different contexts the same sentence can express different things. What is expressed by "I am living in Amsterdam" depends on who the speaker is in that context. Kaplan's theory of context dependence allows us to distinguish different reasons why a sentence is "necessarily" true.

First, what a sentence expresses in context *c* can be true everywhere. A sentence like "Hesperus is Phosphorus" is necessary in this way, given that the meaning of a proper name is just its referent. But it might also be the case that a sentence is true in every context in which it is expressed. An English sentence like "I am here now" is necessarily true for this reason. Consider John utters "I am John", this sentence is necessarily true, the sentence can intuitively be informative. This is because the hearer might be ignorant of the identity of the speaker, or at least doesn't know that he is called 'John'. This intuition can be accounted for in the theory by claiming that the speaker doesn't know in which context he is in. 

People can doubt whether the identity statement "Hesperus is Phosphorus" is really true because the referent of a proper name is context dependent, just like the referent of 'I'. Not only the reference of expressions like "I" and "you" depend on contingent features of the context, but it is also true, according to the causal theory of reference, for proper names and natural kind terms.

Notice there is a difference between the sense in which the reference of these expressions depend on the context. The expression 'I' is context-dependent because in English, 'I' always refers to the speaker in direct speech, and the same expression *of English* might be uttered by different speakers. The reference of 'Phosphorus' and 'water' on the other hand are context dependent only because in different worlds they have a different meaning, or causal origin. "I" is also context-dependent in that sense. So, assuming we speak a particular language, it follows that we sometimes don't know the meanings of the expressions we use. Though this conclusion is natural to some, to others it feels like a contradiction in terms.

# Indefinites and Anaphora
---
According to Quine, our learning and use of pronouns marks our ability to refer. Scholastic philosophers held that pronouns can refer back to indefinites because indefinites are referential expressions. The indefinite refers to that object that the speaker intends to refer to by the use of the indefinite. If a speaker uses a referential expression in his utterance, the proposition expressed by this utterance is object-dependent.

Geach criticizes this account. If John intends to refer to *d* by his use of the indefinite *an S*, and wants to say of *d* that he is *P*, even though *d* is not, John is not saying something false when he claims *An S is P*, according to Geach, if there actually is an S that is P.

Let's represent An S is P as $\exists  x (Sx \land Px)$. A sequence of the form Some S is P. It is Q should be translated, according to Geach, as $\exists x(Sx \land Px \land Qx)$.

There are problems with this assumption. First, it leads to the unnatural consequence that we can interpret a sentence with an indefinite or other anaphoric initiator only at the end of the whole discourse. Second, if we want to interpret the pronouns in a donkey sentence like *If a former owns a donkey, he beats it* as bound variables, it seems we have to represent the indefinites in the antecedent as universal quantifiers to get the truth conditions right. But then it seems we have to give up compositionality. We cannot treat indefinites in all contexts in the same way. Finally, we cannot even get the truth conditions right by assuming that all pronouns should be treated as bound variables. This was shown by Evans by sentences like *Tom owned some sheep and Harry vaccinated them.* According to a Geachian analysis of this sentence, we learn that Harry vaccinated some sheep that Tom owned if we accept what is expressed by the sentence; what we seem to learn though is that Harry vaccinated all of the sheep that Tom owned. Evans proposed that in a sequence of the form *Some S are P. They are Q*, the pronoun *they* goes proxy for the description *(all) the S such that P*. Such pronouns are called E-type pronouns.

However, if we use the term *unbound pronoun* in the above sense, it seems that not even all unbound pronouns go proxy for the definite or universal noun phrase recoverable from the antecedent clause and should be treated as E-type pronouns. Consider for instance *Yesterday, John met some girls. They invited him to their place.* We don't want to say that *they* need to stand for all the girls John met yesterday. If we want to say that the pronoun is going proxy for a description recoverable from its antecedent, the relevant description should not be definite or universal, but *indefinite*: *some girls that John met yesterday*. To treat the pronoun as an abbreviation of an indefinite description also seems to be needed to get the right reading of a sentence like *Socrates owned a dog, and it bit him*. It seems that this sentence can be true if there was a dog that Socrates owned and it bit him, although at the same time there was also another dog that he owned that did not bite him.

A correct analysis for such discourses was given in a variety of theories. These theories treat anaphoric pronouns simply as bound variables and indefinites as existential quantifiers. However, they interpret the existential quantifiers dynamically in such a way that they introduce new objects, or discourse referents, that are available for reference. In this way, they solve Geach's incrementality problem. Moreover, they assure that with negation and conditionals, a universal quantification over assignment functions or sequences of individuals is involved, thereby accounting for donkey sentences and solving Geach's compositionality problem.

Note that due to their use of existential closure, the anaphoric pronoun *he* in a sequence like *A man is walking in the park. He is whistling* is basically treated as an abbreviation of the indefinite description "a man who is walking in the park". But claiming that the pronoun is an abbreviation of an indefinite description would be implausible since pronouns are *definite* expressions. If a singular pronoun cannot be treated as a definite description that refers to all off the objects that verify the antecedent sentence, how can a pronoun be treated as a definite expression?

Some *empirical phenomena* also suggest that unbound anaphoric pronouns should in general have a more specific interpretation than the standard dynamic theories can offer. One of these specific phenomena is the case of *pronominal contradiction*. When John asserts *A man is running through the park*, Mary may react by saying *He is not running, but just walking.* In such examples, the pronoun cannot be used as an abbreviation for the indefinite description *a man i running in the park.* The natural assumption to make here is to say that in this case the pronoun is used referentially, referring back to the *speaker's referent* of the antecedent indefinite, the man the speaker had in mind for his use of the indefinite.

The following example suggests that anaphoric pronouns are usually used in this referential way. If John says *A man called me up yesterday*, it would be odd for John to reply to Mary's question *Did he have a gravel voice?* by uttering *That depends, if he called up in the morning he did, if he called up in the afternoon, he did not*. if in fact two men called John up yesterday.  It's not easy to see how this phenomenon can be explained if it assumed that pronouns should simply be treated as variables bounded by dynamic existential quantifiers. A natural explanation can be given if it is assumed that for the use of the pronouns the speaker must have a specific object 'in mind'.

