# The Traditional Conception of Meaning, Thought, Assertion, and Implicature
---
On the traditional view, the meaning of a non-indexical declarative is the [[The Metaphysics of Meaning, Propositions and Possible Worlds#Propositions|proposition]] it expresses. The meaning of a sentence containing an indexical, or other context-sensitive expression, is a rule for determining the different propositions it expresses in different contexts of utterances.

In short, the meaning of S is a function from contexts C to propositions expressed by S in C, where if S is non-indexical the function yields the same proposition for every C.

This proposition is often described as what S "says" in C. This is informal terminology as speakers not sentences *say* things, but it's justified by the close connection traditionally seen between the semantic content of S in C and the proposition asserted by a speaker who utters S in C. Special cases aside, such a speaker is taken to assert the proposition S semantically expresses, plus some of its obvious consequences. This is the core of the information carried by the utterance.

In addition to asserting propositions, utterances carry *conversational implicatures*, in the sense of Grice, which arise not from the meaning of the sentences uttered, but form the communicative uses to which they are put.

For Grice, the chief goal of most communication is the cooperative exchange of information, which is governed by conversational maxims for securing its efficient achievement. The combined force of these maxims directs one to make a maximally informative, succinct, and relevant contribution (given the aims of the conversation) for which one has adequate evidence..

A *conversational implicature* is a proposition, over and above what one asserts, belief in which is required by the presumption that one is obeying the maxims.

In standard cases, a speaker s conversationally implicates q by saying p iff
1. s is presumed to be obeying the maxims
2. the supposition that s believes q is required to make s's saying p consistent with this presumption
3. s thinks that s's hearers recognize both the requirement in (2) and that s knows that they recognize the requirement.


Well known examples include
1. The case of the professor, who, when asked for a job recommendation, writes only that her student speaks good English and attends class regularly, thereby implicating that there is nothing good to say about his ability to teach philosophy
2. The case of one who, when addressed by a stranded motorist seeking help who says "I'm out of gas", responds "There is a gas station around the corner," thereby implicating that it is, or may be, open for business.

More philosophically significant examples include
3. The implicature that one who asserts a disjunction has non-truth-functional grounds for believing it.
4. The implicature that one who says <It's true that S\> rather than simply S is referring to a previously made, or contemplated, remark, and conceding or endorsing it. 
5. The implicature that one who says <Actually S\> rather than simply S is contrasting the actual world-state with salient possible states at which S is untrue.

The conversational implicature is not asserted, but merely conveyed by the fact that the speaker said what he/she did.

Grice also identifies what he calls *conventional implicatures*, which are non-asserted suggestions generated by non-truth-conditional aspects of the meaning of the sentence uttered. For example, an utterance of "She is poor but honest" implicates (due to the meaning of but) that there is a contrast between poverty and honest; an utterance of 'He is an Englishman and therefore, brave' implicates (due to the meaning of therefore) that being brave is usual for Englishmen; and an utterance of 'Ed hasn't arrived yet' implicates (due to the meaning of yet) that Ed's arrival is expected.

These suggestions, along with what an utterance asserts and conversationally implicates, make up the bulk of the information it carries, on the traditional picture.

The relationship between semantic content and assertion is given in 1.
1. One who assertively utters S (speaking literally and without conversational implicature canceling the normal force of the remark) in a context C says, or asserts, *the semantic context of S in C*, also known as *the proposition semantically expressed by S in C*. Any additional propositions asserted are obvious and relevant consequences of this proposition plus the propositions presupposed in C (excluding those that are consequences of the presupposed propositions by themselves).