Metaphysicians seek to understand the world, and a large part of that project is *ontology*: a theory of what exists, and of what those existing things are like. They also seek to uncover the fundamental structure of reality. This includes understanding what depends upon what, and how.

In addition, metaphysicians want to know not just what exists but what exists most *fundamentally* and *really*. Minimally, it seems clear that what exists fundamentally cannot depend for its existence on things that do not exist fundamentally. So a theory of metaphysical dependence would greatly constrain our theory of what is fundamental.

Economy with respect to fundamental entities seems to be of much [[Systematizing the theoretical virtues|greater importance]] than economy with respect to less fundamental ones:

> [!box_name] PMeth 1.0 The Zeroth Corollary of Ockham's Razor.
> Other things being equal, prefer the theory that posits the smallest number of fundamental entities.

In recent years, many metaphysicians, following the lead of Kit Fine have used the term 'grounding' to represent a relation of metaphysical dependency: if $x$ is *grounded* in $y$, then $x$ (in a certain sense) depends upon $y$, for its existence, or truth, or nature. 

If $x$ grounds $y$, call $x$ the 'fundans' (plural: 'fundantia) and $y$ the 'fundatum' (plural: 'fundata), from the Latin verb 'fundare', to found or ground.

There are various theories about what the relation of grounding is like. They're not all pair-wise incompatible. Some may be combined, others cannot. We can identify at least three conceptions of grounding:

1. Grounding is a kind of explanation: the metaphysical explanation of some facts or truths in terms of others.
2. Grounding is a relation of dependency between entities that is generated by the essences or real natures of those entities: $x$ depends on $y$ just in case $y$ occurs as a constituent within the definition of $x$'s essence or real definition. We will call this relation 'ontological dependence'.
3. Grounding is a relation of constitution or construction between entities: $x$ depends on $y$ just in case $x$ is constructed from $y$, or $y$ is an essential element in the constitution of $x$.

Here we'll focus on the first conception, grounding as metaphysical explanation. If grounding in a kind of explanation, what kind of explanation is it? Litland suggests that it is a matter of explaining *how* something is the case. When $p$ grounds $q$, that $p$ is the case is a *way for* $q$ to be the case. Talk of "what is the case"  can be understood in two ways:

1. In a conceptual or logical way, explaining the *truth* of one proposition in terms of the truth of other propositions, by reference to the essences of the conceptual components of the propositions involved.
2. In a purely ontological way, explaining the *existence* of one fact or the *actuality* of some state of affairs in terms of other facts or arrangements of things in the world.

There are several important questions about grounding:

- Can facts about grounding themselves be grounded?
- Do grounds entail what they ground?
- How is grounding different from causal explanation?

## Is Grounding Real?
---
Here we'll consider whether there is such a thing as grounding or metaphysical explanation.

> [!box_name] 3.1T Real Grounding.
> There is a relation of *metaphysical grounding*.

There are several reasons for thinking so.

### Connections with Natural Language
The notion that some facts are grounded in others is a matter of common sense, well marked in the conventional features in natural language. In English we express a relation of grounding by means of expressions like 'by virtue of', 'in virtue of', 'thereby', and 'makes'.

1. Four is an even number *by virtue of* its divisibility by two.
2. The word 'wounded' is in the past tense *in virtue of* its '-ed' ending.
3. Mary crossed the finish line first and *thereby* won the race.
4. Jamie's valid election to the office *makes* her the president of this club.

None of these cases seem to involve a cause-and-effect relationship between two events or conditions. Being divisible by two doesn't *cause* four to be even. Two's evenness just *consists in* it being divisible by two.

### Fruitfulness of grounding
The notion of grounding can be very useful for defining other metaphysical notions:
- $x$ is fundamental $=$ $x$ is not grounded by anything
-  $x$ is derivative $=$ $x$ is grounded by something
-  $x$ is an integrated whole $=$ $x$ wholly grounds each of $x$'s proper parts
-  $x$ is a mere heap $=$ $x$ is wholly grounded by its proper parts

We can even define fundamental truths as those that are "zero-grounded", meaning grounded by the null set of facts.

> [!box_name] Def D3.1 Entitive Grounding.
> Entity $x$ *(entitively) grounds* $y$ if and only if $y$'s existence and all of the facts intrinsic to $y$ are wholly grounded in the fact of $x$'s existence and all of the facts intrinsic to $x$.

We can also use grounding to define which properties are intrinsic to an entity. Grounding as a relation between facts is normally taken to be *factive*: that is, if the fact that $p$ grounds the fact that $q$ , then both $p$ and $q$ are true.

We could also introduce a non-factive grounding relation between propositions. Proposition $p$ non-factively grounds proposition $q$ if and only if it's possible that $p$ factively grounds $q$.

There is also a distinction between one fact's wholly grounding versus only partially grounding another. For example, the fact that the set $\{0, 1\}$ has two members is wholly grounded in the fact that it has $0$ as a member together with the fact that it has $1$ as a member and perhaps the fact that $0$ and $1$ are different. The fact is partially grounded by each of the individual facts.

> [!box_name] Def D3.2 Partial Grounding.
> The fact that $p$ is a *partial ground* for the fact that $q$ if and only if there is a set $\Gamma$ of facts containing the fact that $p$ such that $\Gamma$ wholly grounds the fact that $q$.

We can also define a relation of weak grounding.

> [!box_name] Def D3.2 Weak Grounding.
> That $p$ is a *weak ground* for the fact that $q$ if and only if either the fact that $p$ grounds the fact that $q$ or $p = q$.

### Grounding is different from conceptual priority, reduction, and supervenience
Grant we have good reason to believe there is metaphysical grounding. Now we need to investigate whether this is an independent, indispensable notion not definable in terms of other familiar relations.

> [!box_name] Indefinable Grounding
> The grounding relation is unique and indefinable.

> [!box_name] Definable Grounding
> The grounding relation is definable in terms of other relations.

We might think that grounding is or is definable in terms of conceptual analysis, reduction, or supervenience. Consider conceptual analysis first.

What is *conceptual analysis*?
1. First, a conceptual analysis of one proposition into another preserves the semantic content or cognitive significance of the analyzed proposition (the analysandum).
2. The structure of the two propositions should be similar, with the exception that simple elements in the analysandum have been expanded into more complex expressions in the analysans.

There seems to be a mismatch between the domains of grounding and conceptual analysis. Grounding seems to relate facts or entities "in the world", while analysis is clearly not such a relation. It relates propositional contents.

More importantly, there are instances of grounding that have nothing to do with conceptual analysis. Suppose that its part of the very essence of water to consist of H2O molecules as Kripke argues. Then the fact that the pitches is full of what is wholly grounded in the fact that it is full of H2O molecules. Conceptual analysis is supposed to be *[[Kinds of Truths|a priori]]*, while facts about grounding can be empirical discoveries.

What about reduction? There have been two conceptions of reduction in analytic philosophy. 

*Theoretical* reduction: the reduction of one's scientific theory to another. 
*Ontological* reduction: the reduction of one object or class of objects to another.

It's not because of something idk.

Ontological reduction is much closer to grounding. In fact, one might reasonably suppose that ontological reduction is a special case of grounding: 