# The Threat to the Unity of Content
---
There are longstanding and plausible assumptions about intentional content.
1. Ever since Aristotle invented the practical syllogism, it's been assumed that intentional states such as beliefs and desires get their point and rationale from the role they play in the commonsense psychological explanation of human behavior. This is not a feature which can be repealed.
2. There is the general assumption of the externalist constitution of content. It's widely believed that content  as it is specifiable in that-clauses is constituted by the external environment of agents who possess intentional or contentful states.

Neither assumption is wholly uncontroversial. Philosophers have opposed the first assumption on the grounds that an undue stress on the explanatory role of content will make us instrumentalists about content.

Philosophers have opposed the second assumption on a variety of grounds. Both these assumptions will be defended later. But they won't be defended here, rather the thesis they rest on will be defended. The thesis of the "unity of content".

To repeat, the thesis is simply this: what makes it possible for intentional states to have a role in the commonsense psychological explanation of behavior (thesis 1) is the very fact of their possessing content which is externally constituted (thesis 2).

Philosophers who accept the two assumptions have turned to denying the unity defined upon them.

What is it to deny the unity of content? It's to say that we need two notions of content, each satisfying one of the two assumptions: One notion which is used in the explanation of behavior, and the other which is externally constituted. This denial of unity can be called the "bifurcation" of content

Philosophers have turned against unity because they've felt a supposed tension. They generate this tension using examples. The general point of these examples is to show that if, according to the second assumption, content harbors elements that are external to agents, then intentional states will be impaired for the explanatory tasks demanded by the first assumption. Since the object of explanations is to illuminate the behavior of individual agents, anything that is cited in these explanations must be constituted within these agents.

The denial of unity is the denial that explanatory tasks can be carried out by externally constituted content. Let's give some examples.

A modification of Kripke's well-known puzzle about belief. Someone called Pierre learns from his nanny, while growing up monolingually in Paris, something which he expresses by saying "*Londres est jolie*". Later, Pierre settles in a pretty section of London, after picking up the native language, he's disposed to say "London is pretty". However, he does not realize that the city he learnt about in Paris is the city of which he is now a resident.

We want to say that if Pierre is disposed to sincerely utter "London is pretty", then he believes London is pretty. Kripke formulates this assumption into something he calls  "the principle of disquoatation." The question is, what is it that Pierre is assenting to? Does he believe the same thing (have the same content) when he assents to "*Londres est Jolie?*"

If you cite such examples to raise issues for the explanatory powers of externally determined content, you would answer in the affirmative. Why?

Apart from the assumption of the close connection between belief and meaning (i.e. "the principle of disquoatation"), this affirmative issues from two further assumptions.
1. Externalism is tied to a certain notion of reference.
2. Translation preserves reference (and, therefore, truth of the sentences which are assented to).

Since, on that view of reference, "*Londres*" refers to London, and since "London" translates to "*Londres*", the two belief contents must be the same.

Before we continue, let's compare the variant example to Kripke's original example.

In Kripke's example, Pierre's upbringing in Paris is the same as the variant, but things are different when he goes to London: he settles in an ugly section of the city and is disposed to utter "London is not pretty." The example gives rise to a puzzle because, given the above assumptions one would conclude by attributing inconsistent beliefs to Pierre and we can take for granted on the basis of the rest of his behavior that Pierre isn't insane, there is a *prima facie* puzzle generated by the fact that he must be attributed an inconsistent belief.

Explaining the puzzle away means giving up on the above, seemingly obvious, assumptions about the nature of content and its attribution.

In the variant example the problem is not that inconsistent beliefs are attributed to Pierre. He has the same belief attributed to him earlier in Paris and later in London. The source of common difficulty between both examples lies in an element essential to both. Pierre does not know of the identity that holds between London and *Londres*. 

This common element gives rise to the general difficulty that has nothing to do specifically with Pierre being attributed inconsistent beliefs. The general difficulty, rather, is that beliefs attributed under the assumptions mentioned simply cannot account for the inferences that an agent such as Pierre might make or fail to make. Since the inferences they're unable to capture might be practical as well as theoretical, and since explanation of behavior turns on capturing the practical inferences of agents, these examples bring out the fact that content attributed under these assumptions will not always be efficacious in explanations.

What has gone wrong with the content attributions? Why are they inefficacious in explanation? The answer is they're insensitive to Pierre's different *conceptions* of London. Pierre conceives of London differently when he's in Paris and when he's in London. It's because he has different conceptions that it's possible for him to fail or realize the identity of London and *Londres*. What goes into Pierre's inferences and therefore into explanations of his actions are Pierre's conceptions of London and so it's not surprising that these contents will fail to capture his inferences and explain his actions.

How then may we arrange things so we have content which *is* efficacious in explanations? The answer is that the problematic content attributions are made under an externalist view of content and in the external world there is only one city, so externally determined contents will not capture Pierre's two different conceptions of the city which go into his inference and into the explanations of his action. We need to posit a second notion of content which is not externalist but which looks to Pierre's inner conceptions, and actions will be explained by this second notion of content.

In this example, Pierre will have two beliefs about the city of London, as different from each other as the beliefs "London is pretty" and "Rio is pretty". No problem remains for accounting for why he fails to make the inference.

The failure to make inferences is accounted for precisely because the second notion of content which captures Pierre's conceptions is individuated in terms of the role of intentional states in inferences.

This is the response of the orthodoxy on the subject of content. The first notion of content which is externally constituted in accordance with these assumptions and which gives rise to the problem is called "wide" contents. The second internal notion of content which is determined by inferential or conceptual role and which is used in explanations is called "narrow" content.

The second sort of example is Putnam's twin-earth. An agent on earth and his twin on twin-earth are internally identical but their environments are different in a very specific way: what is called "water" on twin-earth has a different chemical composition, XYZ, rather than H2O.

An agent and his twin on twin-earth, both innocent of chemistry, might use a word like "water" in expressing beliefs and desires which explain some action of theirs, say, the action of drinking a tumbler filled with some substance, because each desires that his thirst be quenched and believes that drinking it will quench his thirst. The argument, as it standardly proceeds, points out that the chemical composition of the substance in their external environment being talked and thought about is quite different and so, given externalism, is their thoughts and talk.

But in the narrow internalist sense of talk (the sense relevant to psychological explanation), the thought and talk aren't interestingly different. Explanations of their respective actions aren't going to be different in any interesting sense. Actions both get a common description and are both explained by the same thing. The fact, unknown to them, the chemical composition of what they're drinking is different makes no difference to the psychological springs of their actions.

As far as the interests of explainers of their actions are concerned, that chemical fact does not have the effect of showing that their respective actions must be differently described. And so it does not have the effect of showing that they must have different water-beliefs and water-desires. 

But if we looked to the external element as constitutive of content, we would turn up two different beliefs for the twins since the substances have different chemical compositions in their respective external environments.

So the taxonomy dictated by externalism in the twin-earth example has us attributing two beliefs where explanation requires one, whereas externalism in the Pierre example dictated that there be one belief where explanation requires two. The point in both cases is that a second notion of content, which shuns externalism, will have to be introduces to capture their respective coarseness and fineness of grain.

Now we'll sketch the orthodox externalisms in the following section and discuss how the assumptions of their truth in the examples is the source of the threat to unity.

# The Orthodox Externalisms
---
There are at least three substantially different orthodox externalist positions. They can be discussed under two headings: social externalism and non-social externalism, with two positions falling under the latter heading.

## Social Externalism
The most influential proponent of social externalisms is Tyler Burge. Consider the following:

There is man named Bert who thinks that arthritis is a disease that can strike the thigh as well as the joints; in this he is mistaken since, as his doctors will tell him, arthritis is a disease of the joints only. 

Burge insists that despite this, his concept of arthritis is the same concept as the doctor's. So, when Bert thinks or utters various things about arthritis such as "Arthritis is a disease" or "I have arthritis in my ankles" or "I have arthritis in my thighs" he is thinking and talking about the same things as the doctor when he says some of theses things. Why? Because that is how the society and its experts use the term and their usage constitutes the concepts and therefore the contents of individuals in the society, even of such medically ignorant individuals as Bert.

The constitutive social thesis is fortified by the following thought-experiment. Imagine, another social environment in which the same word "arthritis" is applied to a larger class of rheumatoid ailments, one that can strike the thigh as well as the joints. Imagine there is a counterfactual Bert who is, internally, not different from the actual Bert. All that is internal to him is the same. Molecule for molecule identical, his inner functional states are identical, he utters the same sounds and writes the same shapes. In this counterfactual social setting we must not say that Bert's belief which he expressed by saying "I have arthritis in my thigh" is the belief that he has arthritis in his thigh. It is not a belief about arthritis which is a disease only of the joints. 

Why is his belief about another disease? Because counterfactual Bert's community, in particular its experts, have a quite distinct linguistic usage for the term and it's their linguistic practices that constitute his concepts and contents.

To put the constitutive thesis of social externalism in a word: the linguistic practices of a community can often affect the individual mind in the sense that we attribute to an individual the same concepts as his fellows, even where he has quite divergent beliefs.

This is a very strong thesis. There's a weaker and less interesting thesis about the social nature of language. We'll cite it not to exploit the difference later on.

This is the thesis, stressed by Putnam, called "the division of linguistic labor" and it is often confused with Burge's stronger thesis. An individual agent often relies on experts in his society to pick out a certain kind of thing from others (an elm tree from a beech tree) without in any serious way getting fully educated into the criteria for such individuation. This means that he will only accurately discover what he means and believes by observing his dependence on some others in his community; and so his concept of an elm is not entirely independent of his social environment.

This is not equivalent to Burge's thesis because his reliance on others is *part* of his concept of an elm tree. He does *not* have the same concept of an elm tree as the experts themselves have. He may pick out the same things as they do but the beliefs via which he does so will be different from those by which the experts pick them out. Essential to his picking out those things is that those are the things that the expert has told him are elms. It's a crucial part of the relying agent's concept of an elm tree that he believes that elm trees are what the experts around him call "elms". The experts concepts will be determined by more purely botanic or dendrological beliefs. If the thesis of linguistic division of labor does not imply that individual agents have the experts' concept when they rely on them, then it cannot be Burge's stronger thesis. We'll reserve words like "constitutive" for the stronger view. Social externalism is defined by this constitutive thesis.

Social externalism can be described as the thesis that an individual's concepts are often determined by the experts in his or her society. Another way to describe it is to say that his concepts are based on a socially mediated account of *reference*. What a term in an individual's speech refers to or what his concept applies to is determined by things as the experts take those things to be.

The sequence which introduces social externalism is something like:
1. Her concept is given by the reference of the relevant terms
2. Reference is determined by something in the world external to her
3. But only as the experts take the things to be.

It is (3) which brings in the specifically *social* externalism.

## Non-Social Externalism
If we drop the specifically social externalism introduced by (3), we are left with the idea of reference, not socially determined or mediated, but just simply reference.

The word that comes to mind and has been used to describe the doctrine is *direct* reference. That's the general idea underlying what we have called non-social externalism.

### Causal-Essentialist Externalism
There is a mountain of writing on the idea of "direct" reference ever since Kripke and Putnam first formulated the idea. The writing elaborates on several different aspects of the idea. An aspect that's important emerges if we ask how to understand (2) in the sequence above.

How does the thing external to the agent determine her concept or the reference of her term? One must say something about that or else "direct reference" will remain quite mysterious.

The proposal in Kripke's own writings is, for terms such a proper names, roughly as follows: A thing, a person, a place, is first named at some point, say, in a baptismal ceremony or some less ceremonial way. This sets up the beginning of a causal story which, if ever it were told, would describe an elaborate chain of events, all causally linking this initial episode with any subsequent use of that term, even centuries later and in distant places.

If in different languages the term is translated into a different inscription or vocable, those translation events will form part of the causal chain which will connect any use of the term with the initiating event.

Thus, we may say that Pierre's use of "*Londres*" while he was in Paris is connected causally by some elaborate chain of events to some initial event in which a city got named. His later use of "London" is similarly connected to that initial event, though of course without any translation events forming part of the connecting chain. Both terms in his use can therefore be said to refer to the city, London. They do so in virtue of the relationship they bear to the city via the initial event to which they are distantly connected by all these other events. The idea of direct reference is grounded in this elaborate causal story.

The directness of reference can only be spoiled by a *conceptual* mediation of the objected named, not by distance of causal mediation.

One may be tempted to think there is a conceptual mediation because, say, in some intial ceremony some official said, "I Now name this city, which flanks both sides of Thames 'London'". You may think that these brief descriptions of the city's geography must count as conceptual mediation.

This would be wrong according to the theory. Such descriptions may count as descriptions which *fix the reference* of the term "London" as that particular city, but they may not count as conceptually mediating *subsequent* referrings to that city by use of "London". To put it in Fregean terms, they may not count as the "sense" of "London". All referrings, after the description of the initial event have fixed the reference, are direct. The description's drop out.

That is one version of non-social externalism. This externalism is by no means restricted to proper names or singular concepts buy extends to many common nouns, most famously, natural kind terms or concepts.

The idea is that many of our general terms, for example, "water" or "gold" or "lemon" refer directly to things with a certain nature. Our use of these terms first turns on there being some paradigm or paradigmatic example that set the standard for reference. Then anything with the same nature will count as a thing or substance falling under that concept. Both with proper names and natural kind terms things which are present provide the basis for reference. They do so by bearing the right relation to our subsequent use of these terms. 

### Causal-Informational Externalism
A second, more recently influential, version of non-social externalism may be found in Jerry Fodor's book. It's an externalist account of content built on a refinement of information-based semantics. After criticizing Kripke-style causal accounts for concentrating on the causal history of terms, Fodor stresses that the causal links one must look to are those between tokens of mental representations and properties in the external environment.

His question is: what does the fact that a certain mental representation means horse consist in? An information-based semantics aims to provide a naturalistic answer to this sort of question by looking to the information carried by the internal symbols; and the idea of information-carrying is naturalized by appeal to relations of causal covariance between symbols (the information-carries) and things symbolized (the things that the information carried is about).

As Fodor says,

> "In a word, As carry information about Bs if the generalization 'Bs cause As' is true and counterfactual-supporting."

There are plenty of refinements Fodor introduces to this basic externalism: most of them enter to account for the possibility of misrepresentations or false beliefs. But once refinements are in place the basic idea remains: "horse" means what it does because of the causal connections that hold between horses and tokens of "horse". Call this externalism "causal-informational" externalism.

# Why the Orthodox Externalisms threaten Unity and Bilgrami's does not.
---
The diagnosis of disunity is that content's unity is disrupted when content leaves out an agents conception of things. One reason why content would leave out an agent's conception of things is the story by which content was determined stressed the external things themselves to the exclusion of the agent's conceptions of those things.

Each of the orthodox externalisms does precisely that. The one that most explicitly does it is non-social causal-essentialist externalism. The whole point of its emphasis on *direct* reference to external things is to leave out the mediation that might be brought by agent's conceptions.

Fodor's causal-informational version of non-social externalism is different in that it sheds some of its features of appealing to the causal links with an original baptism. But it is determined to keep out of the determination of content exactly those features that the diagnosis of disunity makes clear are needed if unity is not to be undermined. Note that his is a strict denotational semantics Fodor's grounding of step (2) grounds its denotation or direct reference. It is items in the external world without mediation which must co-vary with our symbol tokens.

Social externalism gives an initial impression of standing apart from the other externalisms which depend on direct reference because it demands a mental mediation of the reference of many terms, a mediation usually by the beliefs and linguistic practices of an agent's community.

The problem is this view still fails to capture an individual agent's conceptions. There are bound to be agents who lack the knowledge of experts and whose linguistic practices will be out of tune with the community. For these agents, social externalist content will ignore the individual conceptions and another notion of content will have to be posited to capture them.

Twin-agents get different explanations when they should get the same. The concepts between Bert and counterfactual Bert will be different, whereas our intuition about explanation require they be the same.

If Bert and Counterfactual Bert put a balm on their respective thighs because they want to relieve what they take to be painful arthritis, our intuitions tell us that no matter what their community and experts think, they have the same psychological conceptions, and therefore as far as psychology is concerned these amount to being the same explanations.

Social externalism may have some advantages over non-social ones. Brian Loar, for example, says:

> A non-social causal theory requires non-socially-mediated causal reference relations. I doubt that we have conceptions of such relations.... Consider the simple fact that there is no such thing as *the* natural kind to which paradigms of a predicate like "dog" belong: they are dogs, members of the family Canidae, mammals. A person's term "dog" does not acquire a natural kind as its reference merely by pointing to paradigms.

Now the diagnosis of disunity has explicitly been made and now that it's been show how it fits the orthodox externalisms, it should be clear that it does not fit the externalism Bilgrami sketches.

The threat comes from the fact that an externalism may appeal to the external world in the determination of concept in a way that leaves out the agent's conception of things. If one appeals to external items in the way proposed by [[Belief, Meaning, and External World#Bilgrami's Externalism|Bilgrami's constraint]], there is no reason to except that agent's conceptions will be left out in the individuation of content.

The constraint makes sure we get the right descriptions of the external items which determine an agent's concepts, those descriptions will not be dictated from God's point of view, the point of view of experts, or the point of view of a radical interpreter. Only from the point of view of the agent himself.

