Here Bilgrami presents a Fregean argument to put into doubt a widespread assumption about the normative nature of linguistic meaning by looking at the relation that linguistic meaning bears to an agent's linguistic intentions.

Wittgenstein distinguishes viewing intentions as mental *processes* and *experiences* from viewing them in terms of the intentions' *fulfillment.* The latter is the idea of elements in the world that are in accord with these intentional states. For example, the act of taking an umbrella is a fulfillment of my intention to do so on rainy mornings. It is described as being in "accord" with the intentional states in question.

The terms 'fulfillment' and 'accord' convey something that is normative in a broad sense of the term. Things are 'right' in some sense when there is accord and fulfillment of this kind, wrong if there is not. Such is the minimal normativity of intentional states.

If I were to intend to take an umbrella but took a walking stick instead of an umbrella by mistake, then it would be 'a mistake' by these broadly conceived normative lights. So Wittgenstein's view is that the very idea of intention is such that it generates an ideal of norm or correctness, something by the lights of which one can assess one's actions for being correct or wrong, depending on whether they are or fail to be in accord with the intention.

The philosophical force behind such talk of the normativity of intentional states is contrastive: not just with the experiential aspect of mentality but also (with what Kripke brought to the center in his book on Wittgenstein) the dispositional character of mental states.

Normativity, so conceived, is said to be constitutive of intentional states, and is that is so, it puts into doubt that the processual, the inner experiential, and the dispositional, can really be what is primary in our philosophical understanding of intentionality.

What is to be questioned is whether what is true as a general point is true in the case of linguistic intentions, in particular the intentions that speakers have regarding the meanings of their words. Might these be a special exception to the generality of this truth?

# Getting Meaning Intentions Right
---
What are the intentions one has when one says things or means things with one's word (restricting ourselves to assertoric sentences for the sake of simplicity)?

The initial part of Grice's analysis points out that when we say things we have certain nested intentions to have some effect on hearers. In the case of assertorics, the intention is to get them to acquire certain beliefs, say, about the world in one's near vicinity. For example, someone says "That is a snake" with the intention to get someone else to believe that there is a snake in one's path. (In Grice's analysis this intention nests with two others at least whose point is to ensure that the case is a case of getting someone to believe something by telling someone something rather than merely getting it across to them, something that could not be ensured with just that one intention.)

But this analysis invoking these nested intentions is supposed to be just the beginning of an analysis of meaning. One has to add various things to move from an account of *speaker's* meaning, which this analysis provides, to an account of *sentence* meaning. The speaker's meaning of the words uttered is analyzed in terms of the specific intention that the speaker has on that occasion. The sentence meaning is the meaning of the words that the speaker takes his words to have 'timelessly'.

This contrast between what the analysis provides in the first stage and sentence meaning is more visible when they fail to coincide even on the surface, as for instance in metaphors or in indirect speech acts. In a metaphor, one might say some words, such as the familiar "Man is a wolf" with the intention of getting someone to believe that "Human beings are competitive"; in indirect speech acts one might say some words, such as "The train is about to leave," with the intention to get someone to believe that they ought to walk faster and get on the train. The intentions of Grice's analysis do not provide the analysis of the sentence meaning, only of what the speaker meant to convey to the hearer on that occasion with the utterance of those words. The speaker does not take the respective sentences to mean the human brings are competitive or that someone ought to walk faster. He does intend to get the hearer to believe that human beings are competitive in the one case and that he ought to walk faster in the other, but that is speaker meaning. What he takes the sentences he utters to mean is something else.


Grice gives addition analysis of the sentence meaning that the utterance possesses. There's a lot of struggle among Griceans toward further analysis. What is widely considered to be a sensible conclusion here is that Grice needs to bring in something like a truth-conditional analysis of the sentence meaning that the speaker takes his words to have, over and above what means on that occasion with the utterance of that sentence.

The chief point that needs to be made is that the truth-conditions of the sentences by no means coincide with what the initial Gricean analysis of the speakers meaning yields.

This point is well known; still, it is worth being explicit about it. It would be quite wrong to say that the speaker has in mind that "'Man is a wolf' is true if and only if human beings are competitive". Rather, he takes it to be the case that "'Man is a wolf' is true if and only if man is a wolf". There are his sentence meanings and they depart on the visible surface from the speaker's meaning. Even in the case where there is no visible departure of this obvious kind, one should nevertheless acknowledge the difference between speaker's meaning and sentence meaning.

If someone said "Human beings are competitive" with the intention to get someone to believe that human beings are competitive that would still leave intact the distinction between speaker's meaning and sentence meaning since the latter would be given by the truth-conditions of the sentence, not the intention to get someone to believe something that happens to coincide with what is specified by the truth-conditions of the sentence.

**Important point**. We say that when a speaker says something, the sentence meaning is relatively independent of the intentions he has which are emphasized in Grice's initial analysis, because the initial analysis is only of speaker's meaning, of what he means on that occasion. This might give the wrong impression that sentence meaning is not thought of as something that *he* means *at all*, that it attaches to the words he utters but are not meant *by him*. It is indeed he (the speaker) who also takes the sentences he utters to have a sentence meaning over and above what he intends someone to believe with the utterance of that sentence. The speaker is not left out of the picture in sentence meaning. Just because sentence meaning is contrasted with speaker's meaning, it doesn't follow that it's not speakers who take their utterances to have sentence meaning. It's not as if the sentences uttered by speakers possess meaning in some ulterior way and the speakers who speak them don't take them to have that meaning. 

Let's return to the question of the normativity of intentional states. Our question is the relation between the normative nature of intentions and the normative nature of meaning. If Grice is correct and intentions are deeply involved in meaning, we want to know the extent to which the normative nature of intentions imparts, or is of a piece with, the normativity of meaning.

What if often said in the literate on the subject is this. Many of our terms apply to things, and to misapply them is to make a mistake with our terms; and the very possibility of such mistakes amounts to the normativity built into the meanings of our terms. Thus we are right when we apply the term 'snake' to snakes but not to any other thing. When related to our intentional utterances of sentences with these terms, such a view of normativity amounts to something like this. We intend to say things with the words we utter. Thus one might utter, "That is a snake" with the intention of applying those words to a snake in one's path. Now, should it turn out that what is in front of us is, say, a rope and not a snake, we would have gotten things wrong; and that possibility of getting things wrong redeems in the particular case of meaning things with one's words, Wittgenstein's general idea that intentions are, in their essence, normative.

Such intentions as the one just mentioned with which one utters words such as the ones just cited, are just examples of intentions targeting specifically, not actions such as taking one's umbrella but rather linguistic actions. Just as one might make a mistake and not take one's umbrella, so also one might make a mistake and say "That's a snake" in the presence of a rope. In both cases, it's the possibility of such mistakes that reveals the intrinsic normativity of intentions, but in the second case in particular this normativity of intentions captures for meaning via the intentions with which words are uttered, a special case of this normativity.

The normativity of the meaning of terms that comes form the idea of the correct or incorrect application of our terms passes over into the normativity of the intentions with which we use our terms in utterances. We act in accord with the intentions to use the words "That is a snake" to apply to a snake, only when we do so in the precense of snakes.

That it should pass over in this way might be said to be a very important claim in Wittgenstein because unlike Platonic conceptions of the normativity of meaning, this sort of normativity does not owe to abstractions such as Plato's forms or ideas but merely to the intentions with which words are used by linguistic agents. Misapplication of a term is not the violation of a norm because it falls foul of some abstracted ideal but because terms are used in utterances with intentions and we can act in ways that fail to be in accord with those intentions.

There is very good reason to doubt that this picture of the normativity of meaning gets things right. What it gets wrong is the intention that is relevant to meaning. The intention it identifies as being relevant to meaning is in fact relevant to something quite else. The intention relevant to meaning is not (1) "One utters the words 'That is a snake' with the intention of applying them to a snake in one's path." Rather it's (2) "One utters the word 'That is a snake' with the intention of saying something which is true if and only if that is a snake".

Returning now to normativity: we have said that the possibility of getting it wrong is a necessary condition for normativity. In linguistic examples that possibility was supposed to be actualized in cases of the misapplication of terms.

# Can One Fail To Fulfill Meaning Intentions?
---
We have learnt that the intention relevant to meaning target's the truth conditions of one's words. Hence, the failure to fulfill the intention would presumably occur only if one failed to get right that their truth-conditions are, as opposed to occurring when the truth conditions, which one gets right, fails to hold (in our example, when there is no snake but a rope in front of one).

How might someone fail to get right what the truth-conditions of the sentences one utters are? One clear sense in which one might fail to get them right is if one does not know what they are!

A natural question arises: Why should the truth-conditions of one's words not always be what one intends them to be? We'll return to this. First let's ask: how exactly is it that one can intend our words to possess truth-conditions they don't in fact possess as a result of one not knowing what the truth-conditions are? A familiar example is that of a medical ignoramus who intends to say some words that are true if and only if he has a disease either of the joints or ligaments in his thigh. And he says, "I have arthritis in my thigh." He doesn't know that arthritis is a disease of the joints only. So he has said something with truth-conditions other than the truth-conditions he intended. He has failed to act in accord with his intentions. This looks like an example of how one can say something that fails to live up to an intention that is properly identified as being relevant to meaning because they don't know what the words one intends to utter means.

The crucial task is to assess this claim that one may not know the meanings of the words one intends to speak. The question here is not what account of meaning allows it to be the case that a speaker doesn't know what he means. It's trivial to construct such account. The question of concern is what criteria shall we decide what is and isn't tolerable in an account of meaning thought of in terms of truth-conditions.

Note the fact that the idea that the meaning of a sentence is given by its truth conditions was first explicitly formulated in Frege's doctrine of sense. What we will or won't tolerate will depend on seeing what the notion of sense was introduced to do and see whether it will do what it was introduced to do if we allow that one may not know the senses or meanings of one's word. So what is the notion of sense for?

The notion is introduced initially to solve a puzzle about identity. This puzzle is a mere surface reflection of a more deep and fundamental issue. One way of putting the point at stake is to describe it as follows: To be misinformed or uniformed is not to be irrational. No account of the mind can confuse these two ways in which a mind can go wrong. Failures of empirical knowledge and logical error are not to be conflated. The puzzles arise because the examples discussed by Frege threaten to conflate them. It is Frege's view that introducing the notion of sense will provide the best solution to the puzzle/ It is the notion of sense or meaning which makes it clear that no irrationality, no inconsistency, is entailed by someone saying that "Hesperus is bright" and "Phosphorus is not bright". So the puzzle lays down a crucial desidaratum: we know the protagonist in the puzzle to be someone who merely lacks knowledge of an a posteriori identity, so we must find a way to characterize his mentality as representing completely consistent state of affairs. Since it is the positing of senses to his words over and above their reference which helps us achieve such a representation, *nothing* should be tolerated in our understanding of senses that prevents them from carrying out this task.

Nothing should be tolerated in the understanding of the notion of sense or meaning, which will prevent senses from doing what they are supposed to do: solve the puzzle and, by doing so, maintain the most fundamental of philosophical distinctions, that between logical error or irrationality and lack of empirical knowledge.

The fact is that senses will not decisively solve the Frege style of puzzles if it is allowed that we fail to know our own senses or meaning. A failure of transparency in sense will leave it entirely possible that puzzles about identity can arise one level up and so the puzzles will not be satisfactorily solved; or better, they will not once and for all be arrested.

Suppose someone wonders "I wonder if Hesperus is Phosphorus." To make such a wondering intelligible, a Fregean posits senses. But if the wonderer doesn't know his own senses, he may similarly wonder, one step up, if the sense of 'Hesperus' is the same as the sense of 'Phosphorus' (or he may wonder whether the sense of 'bachelor' is the sense of 'unmarried man'). Thus, there is no genuine arrest of the Frege puzzle if it is not laid down as a basic criterion of senses that they be transparent, i.e. known to their possessors. Without this being laid down, the puzzle can always arise one step up, with protagonists as confused about the identity of their senses as they are about planets and cities.

One implication of this is that it amounts to something like a proof that senses are not the sorts of things that we can have multiple perspectives on such that one can get their identifies confused in the way that we can with planets and cities. Whatever senses are, they are not he kind of things that planets and cities are. They are not like anything which allows multiple perspectives on itself and which therefore allows such confusion to be possible. Things on which we can have more than one perspective are by their nature not transparent. 

Those are the considerations that make it intolerable for meanings to not be known by those who speak meaningful words: we'll not be guaranteed to solve the Fregean puzzles; and that in turn amounts to meanings failing to do the very things that meanings and senses were introduced to do. We should therefore regard with suspicion the many accounts of meaning form Plato's down to the secular and mundane versions of Plato in our own time, which allow such an intolerable outcome as a result of prying apart our meanings from our knowledge of them.

The medically ignorant man who says "I have arthritis in my thigh," therefore, though he certainly makes a mistake, makes a mistake about how the term is used in the social linguistic practice. His own linguistic practice is not grooving with theirs. That is his only mistake. He makes no mistake of failing to act in accord with his meaning intentions.

Let's address two false impressions that the idea of such idiosyncrasy in meaning may prompt.
1. It may seem that allowing such idiosyncrasy in our understanding of linguistic meaning would be in some way to undermine the stability of linguistic practice, the regularity of usage that makes interpretation of one another possible. It is these regularities that are captured in the norms of meaning, which the views Bilgrami is opposing is insisting on. Norms which someone may fail to know and therefore fail to know his own meanings. Without such norms there would be no stability in linguistic practice so Bilgrami has only managed to say that meaning intentions are fulfilled in these cases by a theoretical move that destabilizes linguistic practice. Notice a straightforward confusion. It's true that there would have to be a fair amount of regularity in the use of words for speakers to be intelligible to each other and interpretable by one another. Such regularity does not amount to norms.  For understanding each other's utterances to be possible, there must be some general and background regularity in the way we use words. Given this general, background regularity, any particular word may be idiosyncratically used and be understood.
2. There's a common impression that an admission of idiosyncrasy in meaning fails to keep faith with facts about how individuals show deference to the social, especially the experts in their society. Nothing about the view presented denies that the medically ignorant protagonist, as he becomes more knowledgeable, will most likely defer to the expert's linguistic usage and wishes to defer to them. Deference is compatible with the view. All that deference amounts to on this view is that he will change his linguistic behavior and adopts theirs. He always knew what he meant and think (this isn't to suggest that people can never fail to know what they think, that but it's to suggest that when they do fail to know what they think it's for psychological reasons like self-deception and not because secularized Platonist theories about the social constitution of reference and meaning.)

All of these points about transparency, meaning, norm, deference, etc., follow as straightforward theoretical implications of meeting the desideratum that we must have a decisive solution to the Frege-style puzzles about identity. Bilgrami has given this Fregean argument for the transparency of meaning or sense to block one alleged source for the possibility of failure to act in accord with the intention to say something with certain truth-conditions.

If one has knowledge of the right truth-conditions for one's intended words, can one still get the truth-conditions of one's spoken words wrong? Read paper again to see why misspeaking fails.

Bilgrami first argued that if we make such an assumption of intrinsic normativity, then that assumed normativity would have to reside in intentions which, when properly identified, are intentions that target the sentence meaning or truth-conditions of one's words and which, when formulated correctly, have an appropriate generality. If the further Fregean argument is convincing, intentions, so identified, and so formulated, cannot and must not fail to get fulfilled in the speech of those who possess them. And if they cannot fail to get fulfilled, they cannot reflect any genuine normativity, which requires the possibility at least, of the failure to get fulfilled. Therefore, we have a reductio ad absurdum on the assumption of normativity.

# Conclusion
---
Meaning intentions are exceptions to Wittgenstein's insight about the nature of intentions. They are not refutations of his insight. As a generality, it's true that intentions do have the normativity built into them that Wittgenstein brought to our notice. The point is that intentions regarding meanings are a degenerate species of intentions and the depest reasons for this have to do with the fact that meaning something is a rather unique kind of thing in that intending a meaning and living up to that intention are more like one thing rather than two, and so failure is not possible.