The skeptical argument remains unanswered. There can be no such thing as meaning anything by any word. Each new application we make is a leap in the dark; any present intention could be interpreted so as to accord with anything we may choose to do. So there can be neither accord, nor conflict.

Wittgenstein's skeptical problem is related to some work of two other writers who show little direct influence from Wittgenstein.

1. W. V. Quine, whose well-known theses of the indeterminacy of translation and the inscrutability of reference also question whether there are any objective facts as to what we mean. There are differences. Quine bases his argument from the outset on behavioristic premises. He would never emphasize introspective thought experiments in the way Wittgenstein does, and he does not think of views that posit a private inner world as in need of elaborate refutation. Further, since Quine sees the philosophy of language within a hypothetical framework of behavioristic psychology, he thinks of problems about meaning as problems of disposition to behavior. This orientation seems to have consequences for the form of Quine's problem as opposed to Wittgenstein's. The important problem for Wittgenstein is that my present mental state does not appear to determine what I *ought* to do in the future. Although I may *feel* that something in my head corresponding to the word 'plus' mandates a determinate response to any new pair of arguments, in fact nothing in my head does. Quine protests against Wittgenstein that, given our 'inborn propensity to find one stimulation qualitatively more akin to a second stimulation than to a third' and sufficient conditioning 'to eliminate wrong generalizations', eventually the term will be learnt: "... in principle nothing more is needed in learning 'sepia' than in any conditioning or induction." By "learning 'sepia'", Quine means developing the right disposition to apply 'sepia' in particular cases. It should be clear from Wittgenstein's text that he too is aware that in practice there need be no difficulty in this sense about the learning of 'sepia'. The fundamental problem is different: whether my actual dispositions are 'right' or not, is there anything that mandates what they *ought* to be? Since Quine formulates the issues dispositionally, the problem cannot be stated within his framework.
2. Nelson Goodman also deserves comparison with Wittgenstein. The basic strategy of Goodman's treatment of the 'new riddle' is strikingly close to Wittgenstein's skeptical arguments. Although our paradigm of Wittgenstein's problem was formulated for a mathematical problem, it was emphasized that it is completely general and can be applied to any rule or word.  If it were formulated for the language of color impressions, Goodman's 'grue' would play the role of 'quus'. But the problem would not be Goodman's about induction, but Wittgenstein's about meaning: "Who is to say that in the past I didn't mean grue by 'green', so that now I should call the sky, not the grass, 'green'?" Although Goodman concentrates on the problem and induction and largely ignores the problem about meaning, his discussions are occasionally suggestive for Wittgenstein's problem as well. 

Wittgenstein has invented a new form of skepticism. Kripke is inclined to regard it as the most radical and original skeptical problem philosophy has seen to date. The skeptical conclusion is insane and intolerable and Wittgenstein intends to solve it. It is his solution that contains the argument against 'private language'; for allegedly, the solution will not admit such a language. The main problem is *not* "How can we show private language to be *impossible*?" rather it's "How can we show *any language* at all be it public, private, or whatever to be *possible*?". Wittgenstein's main problem is that it appears that he has shown *all* language, *all* concept formation, to be impossible, indeed unintelligible.

It's important to compare Wittgenstein's new form of skepticism with the classical skepticism of Hume; there are important analogies between the two. Both develop a skeptical paradox, based on questioning a certain nexus from past to future. Wittgenstein questions the nexus between past 'intention' or 'meanings' and present practice: for example, between my past 'intentions' with regard to 'plus' and my present computation '68 + 57 = 125'. Hume questions two other nexuses: the causal nexus whereby a past event necessitates a future one, and the inductive inferential nexus from the past to the future.

The analogy is obvious, but has been obscured for several reasons.
1. The Humean and Wittgensteinian problems are distinct and independent, though analogous.
2. Wittgenstein shows little interest in or sympathy with Hume: he has been quoted as saying that he could not read Hume because he found it "a torture". Furthermore, Hume is the prime source of some ideas on the nature of mental states that Wittgenstein is most concerned to attack.
3. Finally, Wittgenstein never avows, and almost surely would not avow, the label 'skeptic', as Hume explicitly did. He has often appeared to be a common-sense philosopher, anxious to defend our ordinary concepts and dissolve traditional philosophical doubts. It is not Wittgenstein who held that philosophy only states what everyone admits?

The difference between Wittgenstein and Hume should not be exaggerated. Even Hume has an important strain, dominant in some of his moods, that the philosopher should never question ordinary beliefs. When asked whether he be a skeptic who hold all is uncertain, Hume replies "that this question is entirely superfluous, and that neither I, nor any other person, was ever sincerely and constantly of that opinion".

What does Hume's skepticism consist?
1. In a skeptical *account* of the causes of our common beliefs.
2. In skeptical analyses of our common notions.

In some ways Berkeley may offer an even better analogy to Wittgenstein. At fist glance, Berkeley with his denial of matter and of any objects outside the mind seems to be denying our common belief. But not for Berkeley. For him, the impression that man is committed to matter and to objects outside the mind derives from erroneous metaphysical interpretation of common talk. When the common man speaks of an 'external material object' he does really mean an *external material object* but rather he means something like 'an idea produced in me independently of my will'.

Berkeley's stance is not uncommon in philosophy. The philosopher advocates a view apparently in patent contradiction to common sense. Rather than repudiating common sense, he asserts that the conflict comes from a philosophical misinterpretation of common language - sometimes he adds that the misinterpretation is encouraged by the 'superficial form' of ordinary speech. He offers his own analysis of the relevant common assertions, one that shows that they do not really say what they seem to say.

Kripke thinks such claims are invariably suspect. That the claimant calls a misleading philosophical misconstrual of the ordinary statement is probably the natural and correct understanding. The real misconstrual comes when the claimant continues, "All the ordinary man really means is ..." and gives a sophisticated analysis compatible with his own philosophy.

Wittgenstein makes a Berkeleyan claim of this kind as his solution to his own skeptical problem begins by agreeing with the skeptics that there is no 'superlative fact' about my mind that constitutes my meaning addition by 'plus' and determines in advance what I should do to accord with this meaning. But he claims the appearance that our ordinary concept of meaning demands such a fact is based on philosophical misconstrual, albeit a natural one, of such ordinary expressions as 'he meant such-and-such', 'the steps are determined by the formula', and the like.

Wittgenstein thinks that any construal that looks for something in my present mental state to differentiate between my meaning addition or quaddition, or that will consequently show that in the future I should say '125' is a misconstrual and attributes to the ordinary man a notion of meaning that *is* refuted by the skeptical argument.

In his *Enquiry*, after he has developed his 'Skeptical Doubts Concerning the Operations of the Understanding', Hume gives his 'Skeptical Solution of These Doubts'. What is a 'skeptical' solution? Call a proposed solution to a skeptical philosophical problem a *straight* solution if it shows that one closer examination the skepticism proves to be unwarranted; an elusive or complex argument proves the thesis the skeptic doubted. An *a priori* justification of inductive reasoning, and an analysis of the causal relation as a genuine necessary connection or nexus between pairs of events would be straight solutions to Hume's problem of induction and causation, respectively. A *skeptical* solution of a skeptical philosophical problem beings by conceding that the skeptic's negative assertions are unanswerable. Nevertheless our ordinary practice or belief is justified because it need not require the justification the skeptic has shown to be untenable. Much of the value of the skeptical argument consists precisely in the fact that he has shown that an ordinary practice, if it is to be defended at all, cannot be defended in a certain way. A skeptical solution may also involve a skeptical analysis or account of ordinary belief to rebut their *prima facie* references to a metaphysical absurdity.

The rough outline of Hume's skeptical solution to his problem are well known. Not an *a priori* argument, but custom is the source of our inductive inferences. If A and B are two types of events which we have seen constantly conjoined, then we are conditioned to expect an event of type B on being presented with one of type A. The idea of a necessary connection comes from the 'feeling of customary transition' between our ideas of these event types.

For comparative purposes one further consequence of Hume's skeptical solution should be noted. Naively, one might suppose that whether a particular event a causes another particular event b, is an issue solely involving the events a and b alone, and involves no other events. If Hume is right, this is not so. Even if God were to look at the events, he would discern nothing relating them other than that one succeeds the other. Only when the particular events a and b are thought of as subsumed under two respective events types, A and B, which are related by a generalization that all events of type A are followed by events of type B, can a said to cause b. When the events a and b are considered by themselves alone, no causal notions are applicable. This Humean conclusion might be called: the impossibility of private causation.

Kripke is suggesting that Wittgenstein's argument against private language has a structure similar to Hume's argument against private causation. Wittgenstein also states a skeptical paradox. Like Hume, he accepts his own skeptical argument and offers a skeptical solution to overcome the appearance of paradox. His solution involves a skeptical interpretation of what is involved in such ordinary assertions as "Jones means addition by '+'." The impossibility of private language emerges as a corollary of his skeptical solution of his own paradox, as does the impossibility of 'private causation' in Hume. It turns out the skeptical solution does not allow us to speak of a single individual considered by himself and in isolation, as ever meaning anything. Once again an objection based on an intuitive feeling that no one else can affect what I mean by a given symbol ignored the skeptical argument that undermines any such naive intuition about meaning.

Wittgenstein agrees with the skeptic that there is no fact which constitutes my meaning addition by 'plus', no such condition in either the 'internal' or the 'external' world. In denying that there is any such fact, might we not be expressing a philosophical thesis that doubts or denies something everyone admits? We do not wish to doubt or deny that when people speak of themselves and others as meaning something by their words, as following rules, they do so with perfect right. We merely wish to deny the existence of the 'superlative fact' that philosophers misleadingly attach to such ordinary forms of words, not the propriety of the forms of words themselves.

So Wittgenstein holds that there is no fact as to whether I mean plus or quus. If this is conceded to the skeptic, what can be said on behalf of our ordinary attributions of meaningful language to ourselves and to others? Has not the incredible and self-defeating conclusion that all language is meaningless already been drawn?

In reply we must say something about the change in Wittgenstein's philosophy of language from the *Tractatus* to the *Investigations*. The rough outlines of the *Tractatus* are well known. To each sentence there corresponds a (possible) fact. If such a fact, obtains, the sentence is true; if not, false. For atomic sentences, the relations between a sentence and the fact it alleges is one of a simple correspondence or isomorphism. The sentence contains names, corresponding to objects. An atomic sentence is itself a fact, putting the names in a certain relation;  and it says that (there is a corresponding fact that) the corresponding objects are in the same relation. Other sentences are (finite or infinite) truth-functions of these. Even though the details of this theory have struck some as an implausible attempt to give natural language a chimerical *a priori* structure based on logical analysis alone, similar ideas often advanced without any specific influence from the *Tractatus*.

The simplest, most basic idea of the *Tractatus* can hardly be dismissed: a declarative sentence gets its meaning by virtue of its *truth conditions*, by virtue of its correspondence to facts that must obtain if its true. For example, "the cat is on the mat" is understood by those speakers who realize that it is true if and only if a certain cat is on a certain mat; it is false otherwise.

So stated, the *Tractatus* picture of the meaning of declarative sentences may seem not only natural but even tautological. Nonetheless, as Dummett says, "the *Investigations* contains implicitly a rejection of the classical (realist) Frege-*Tractatus* view that the general form of explanation of meaning is a statement of truth conditions". In the place of this view, Wittgenstein proposes an alternative rough general picture. (Calling it an alternative theory probably goes too far. Wittgenstein disclaims any intent of offering a general account of language to rival that of the *Tractatus*. Rather we have different activities related to each other in various ways.) 

Wittgenstein replaces the question "What must be the case for this sentence to be true?" by two others:
1. "Under what conditions may this form of words be appropriately asserted or denied?"
2. Given an answer to the first question, "What is the role, and the utility, in our lives of our practice of asserting or denying the form of words under these conditions?"

Wittgenstein does not confine himself to declarative sentences, and hence to assertions and denial, as I have just done. On the contrary, he is strongly concerned to deny any special primacy to assertion, or to sentences in the indicative mood. This itself plays an important role in his repudiation of the classical realist picture. Since the indicative mood is not taken as in any sense primary or basic, it becomes more plausible that the linguistic role even of utterances in the indicative mood that superficially look like assertions need not be one of 'stating facts'. Thus, if we speak properly, we should not speak of conditions of assertion, but more generally of the conditions when a move (a form of linguistic expression) is to be made in the 'language game'. 

If we allow ourselves to adopt an oversimplified terminology more appropriate to a special range of cases, we can say that Wittgenstein proposes a picture of language based, not on truth conditions, but on assertability conditions or justification conditions. Under what circumstances are we allowed to make a given assertion? Pictures of this kind are hardly unknown before Wittgenstein. The positivist verification theory of meaning is one of this kind. So, in a more special context, is the intuitionistic account of mathematical statements. (The classical mathematician's emphasis on truth conditions is replaced by an emphasis on provability conditions.) Of course, Wittgenstein's rough picture should not be identified with either of these. Its second component is distinct: granted that our language game permits a certain 'move' (assertion) under certain specifiable conditions, what is the role in our lives of such permission? Such a role must exist if this aspect of the language game is not to be idle.

Wittgenstein's alternative picture of language is already suggested in the very first section of *Philosophical Investigations*. Many philosophers of mathematics in agreement with the Augustinian conception of 'objects and name' ask such questions as, "What entities are denoted by numerals? What relations among these entities correspond to numerical statements?". Against such a conception of the problem, Wittgenstein asks that we discard any *a priori* conceptions and *look* at the circumstances under which numerical assertions are actually uttered, and at what roles such assertions play in our lives.

Suppose I go to the grocer with a slip marked 'five red apples', and he hands over apples, reciting by heart the numerals up to five and handing over an apple as each numeral is intoned. It is under circumstances such as these that we are licensed to make utterance using numerals.

Wittgenstein imagines the letters of the alphabet, recited in alphabetical order, used in a miniature language game, just as the numbers are in this example. We have little inclination to wonder about the nature of the entities denoted by the letters of the alphabet.

The central question Wittgenstein wishes to ask about the use of language: Do not look for entities and facts corresponding to numerical assertions, but look at the circumstances under which utterances involving numerals are made, and the utility of making them under these circumstances.

The replacement of truth conditions by justification conditions has a dual role in the *Investigations*. 
1. First, it offers a new approach to the problems of how language has meaning, contrasted with that of the *Tractatus*. 
2. Second, it can be applied to give an account of assertions about meaning themselves, regarded as assertions *within* our language.

Recall, Wittgenstein's skeptical conclusion: no facts, no truth conditions, correspond to statements such as "Jones means addition by '+'". 

Now suppose that facts, or truth conditions, are of the essence of meaningful assertions, it will follow from the skeptical solution that assertions that any ever means anything are meaningless. On the other hand, if we apply to these assertions the tests suggested in *Philosophical Investigations*, no such conclusion follows. All that's needed to legitimize assertions that someone means something is that there be roughly specifiable circumstances under which they are legitimately assertable, and that the game of asserting them under such conditions has a role in our lives. No supposition that facts correspond to those assertions is needed.

Kripke gives the following rough structure or *Philosophical Investigations*. 

Sections 1-137 give Wittgenstein's preliminary refutation of the *Tractatus* theory of language, and suggests the rough picture he intends to put in place. This section comes first for a few reasons, but less obviously is this aspect. The skeptical paradox is the fundamental problem of *PI*. If Wittgenstein is right, we cannot begin to solve it if we remain in the grip of the natural presupposition that meaningful declarative sentences must purport to correspond to facts; if this is our framework, we can only conclude that sentences attributing meaning and intention are themselves meaningless.

Sections 138-242 deal with the skeptical problem and its solution. These sections have been the primary concern of this essay. The gist is the conditions for the assertions involve reference to a community. They are inapplicable to a single person considered in isolation. Thus, Wittgenstein rejects 'private language' as early as 202.

The sections following 243, usually called 'the private language argument' deal with the application of the general conclusion about language drawn in 138-242 to the problem of sensations. The skeptical conclusion about rules and the attendant rejection of private rules is hard enough to swallow in general, but it seems especially unnatural in two areas. The first is mathematics and the second is that of sensation, or mental image.

Because these two cases seem so obviously to be counterexamples to Wittgenstein's view of rules, he treats them each in detail. The latter case is treated in the sections following 243. He thinks that only if we overcome our strong inclination to ignore his general conclusion about rules can we see these two areas rightly.

The divisions given here are not sharp.

Wittgenstein's skeptical argument in no way shows that the addition function is vaguely defined. The addition function yields precise values for each pair of numerical arguments. The skeptical problem indicates no vagueness in the concept of addition, or in the word 'plus' granting its usual meaning. The skeptical point is something else.

Wittgenstein is arguing that any explanation may fail of its purpose: if it does not in fact fail, it may work perfectly, even if the concepts involved violate the Fregean requirements of 'sharp boundaries'

Similar remarks apply to the discussion of ostensive definition. Wittgenstein emphasizes that ostensive definitions are always in principle capable of being misunderstood, even the ostensive definition of a color such as 'sepia'. How someone understands the word is exhibited in the way someone goes on, 'the use that he makes of the word defined'. One may go on in the right way given a purely minimal explanation, while one may go on in another way no matter how many clarifications are added, since these too can be misunderstood (a rule for interpreting a rule again).

The paradox of the second part of the *Investigations* constitutes a powerful critique of any idea that 'mental representations' uniquely correspond to 'facts', since it alleges that the components of such 'mental representations' do not have interpretations that can be 'read off' from them in a unique manner. So *a fortiori* there is no such unique interpretation of the mental 'sentences' containing them as 'depicting' one 'fact' or another.

In order for Wittgenstein's skeptical solution of his paradox to be intelligible, the 'realistic' or 'representational' picture of language must be undermined by another paradox.

Wittgenstein's skeptical solution concedes to the skeptic that no 'truth conditions' or 'corresponding facts' in the world exist that make a statement like "Jones means addition by 'plus'" true. Rather we should look at how such assertions are *used*. Can this be adequate? Do we not call assertions like the one just quoted 'true' or 'false'? Wittgenstein's way with such objections is short. Like many others, Wittgenstein accepts the 'redundancy' theory of truth: to affirm that a statement is true is simply to affirm the statement itself, and to say it is not true is to deny it: ('p' is true = p). One might object:
- That only utterances of certain forms are called 'true' or 'false', questions for example are not, and these are so called precisely because they purport to state facts.
- That precisely these sentences that 'state facts' can occur as components of truth-functional compounds and their meaning in such compounds is hard to explain in terms of assertability conditions alone.

Wittgenstein's response to this is also short. We *call* something a proposition, and hence true or false, when in our language we apply the calculus of truth functions to it. That is, it is just a primitive part of our language game, not susceptible of deeper explanation, that truth functions are applied certain sentences.

Finally we can turn to Wittgenstein's skeptical solution and to the consequent argument against 'private rules'. We have to see under what circumstances attributions of meaning are made and what role these attributions play in our lives.

We will not reason *a priori* about the role such statements ought to play; rather we find out what circumstances actually license such assertions and what role this license actually plays. We are *not* looking for necessary and sufficient conditions (truth conditions) for following a rule, or an analysis of what such rule-following 'consists in'. Indeed such conditions would constitute a 'straight' solution to the skeptical problem.

First, consider what is true of one person considered in isolation. The most obvious fact is no one actually hesitates when asked to produce an answer to an addition problem. Almost all of us unhesitatingly produce the answer '125' when asked for the sum of 68 and 57, without any thought to the possibility that a quus-like rule might have been appropriate. We do so without justification. We act unhesitatingly but *blindly*.

This then is an important case of what Wittgenstein calls speaking without 'justification', but not 'wrongfully'. It is part of our language game of speaking of rules that a speaker may, without ultimately giving any justification, follow his own confident inclination that this way is the right way to respond, rather than another way. That is the 'assertability conditions' that license an individual to say that, on a given occasion he ought to follow his rules this way rather than that are ultimately that he does what he is inclined to do.

The important thing about this case is that if we confine ourselves to looking at one person alone, his psychological state and his external behavior, this is as far as we can go. We can say that he acts confidently at each application of a rule; that he says that the way he acts is the way to respond. By definition he is licensed to give without further justification the answer that strikes him as natural and inevitable. No one else by looking at his mind and behavior alone can say something like, "He is wrong if he does not accord with his past intentions"; the whole point of the skeptical argument was there can be no facts about him in virtue of which he accords with his intentions or not. All we can say, if we consider a single person in isolation, is that our ordinary practices license him to apply the rule in the way it strikes him.

This is *not* our usual concept of following a rule. It is by no means the case that, just because someone thinks he is following a rule, there is no room for judgement that he is not really doing so. Someone may think he is following a rule even though he is actually acting at random, in accordance with no rule at all. Alternatively, he may, under the influence of a drug, suddenly act in accordance with a quus-like rule changing from his first intentions. If there could be no justification for anyone to say of a person of the first type that his confidence that he is following some rule is misplaced, or of a person of the second type that he is no longer in accord with the rule he previously followed, there would be little content to our idea that a rule, binds future choices.

We are inclined to accept conditionals of such rough type as, "If someone means addition by '+' then if he remembers his past intention and wishes to conform to it, when he is queried about '68+57' he will answer '125'."

If our considerations so far are correct, the answer is that if one person is considered in isolation, the notion of a rule as guiding the person who adopts it can have *no* substantive content. There are no truth conditions or facts in virtue of which it can be the case that he accords with his past intentions or not. As long as we regard him as following a rule 'privately', so that we can pay attention to his justification conditions alone, all we can say is that he is licensed to follow the rule as it strikes him. This is why Wittgenstein says, "To think one is obeying a rule is not to obey a rule. Hence it is not possible to obey a rule 'privately'; otherwise thinking one was obeying a rule would be the same as obeying it".

The situation is different if we widen our gaze from consideration of the rule follower alone and allow ourselves to consider him as interacting with a wider community. Others will then have justification conditions for attributing correct or incorrect rule following to the subjects, and these will not be simply that the subject's own authority is unconditionally to be accepted.

Consider the example of a small child learning addition. It's obvious that his teacher will not accept just any response from the child. On the contrary, the child must fulfill various conditions if the teacher is to ascribe him mastery of the concept of addition. First, for small enough examples the child must produce almost all of the time the 'right' answer. If a child insists on the answer '7' to the query '2+3' the teacher will say to him, "You are not adding. Either you are computing another function or, more probably, you are yet following no rule at all, but only giving whatever random answer enters your head."

Suppose, the child gets almost all 'small' addition problems right. For large computations, the child can make more mistakes than for 'small' problems, but it must get a certain number right and, when it is wrong, it must recognizably be 'trying to follow' the proper procedure, not a quus-like procedure, even though it makes mistakes. 

Now, what do I mean when I say that the teacher judges the pupil must give the 'right' answer? I mean that the teacher judges that the child has given the same answer that he himself would give. Similarly, when I said the teacher must judge that he is applying the 'right' procedure, I mean he judges that the child is applying the procedure he himself is inclined to apply.

Something similar is true for adults. If someone whom I judge to have been computing a normal addition function suddenly gives answers according to procedures that differ bizarrely from my own, then I will judge that something must have happened to him, and that he is no longer following the rule he previously followed. If this happens to him generally, and his responses display little discernible pattern, I will judge him probably to have gone insane.

From this we can discern rough assertability conditions for such sentences as "Jones mean addition by 'plus'." Jones is entitled, subject to correction by others, provisionally to say, "I mean addition by 'plus," whenever he has the feeling of confidence that he can give 'correct' responses in new cases; and he is entitled, again provisionally and subject to correction by others, to judge a new response to be 'correct' simply because it is the response he is inclined to give. These inclinations are to be regarded as primitive. They are not justified in terms of Jones's ability to interpret his own intentions or anything else. But Smith need not accept Jones's authority on these matters: Smith will judge Jones to mean addition by 'plus' only if he judges that Jones's answer to particular addition problems agree with those he is inclined to give. If Jones consistently fails to give responses in agreement with Smith's, Smith will judge that he does not mean addition by 'plus'. Even if Jones did mean it in the past, the present deviation will justify Smith in judging that he has lapsed.

Sometimes Smith, by substituting some alternative interpretation for Jones's word 'plus', will be able to bring Jones's responses in line with his own. More often, he will be unable to do so and will be inclined to judge that Jones is not really following any rule at all. In all this, Smith's inclinations are regarded as just as primitive as Jones's. In no way does Smith test directly whether Jones may have in his head some rule agreeing with the one in Smith's head. The point is that if, in enough concrete cases, Jones's inclinations agree with Smith's, Smith will judge that Jones is indeed following the rule for addition.

In fact, our actual community is roughly uniform in its practices with respect to addition. Any individual who claims to have mastered the concept of addition will be judged by the community to have done so if his particular responses agree with those of the community in enough cases, especially the simple ones. An individual who passes such tests is admitted into the community as an adder; an individual who passes such tests in enough other cases is admitted as a normal speaker of the language and member of the community. Those who deviate are corrected and told (usually as children) that they have not grasped the concept of addition. One who is an incorrigible deviant in enough respects simply cannot participate in the life of the community and in communication.

Now Wittgenstein's general picture of language requires for an account of a type of utterance not merely that we say under what conditions an utterance of that type can be made, but also what role and utility on our lives can be ascribed to the practice of making this type of utterance under such conditions.

We say of someone else that he follows a certain rule when his response agrees with our own and deny it when they do not; but what is the utility of this practice? The utility of obviously fucking evident. The customer when dealing with the grocer expects the grocer to count as he does, not according to some bizarre non-standard rule. As long as the customer attributes to the grocer a grasp of the concept of addition, he expects that at least the grocer will not behave bizarrely, as he would if he were to follow a quus-like rule. When we pronounce that a child has mastered the rules of addition we mean that we can entrust him to react as we do interactions such as that just mentioned between the grocer and the customer. Our entire lives depend on countless such interactions.

This expectation is not infallibly fulfilled. It places substantive restriction on the behavior of each individual, and it is *not* compatible with just any behavior he may choose.  Contrast this with the case where we considered one person alone. A deviant individual whose responses do not accord with those of the community in enough cases will not be judged, by the community, to be following its rules; he may even be judged as a madman, following no coherent rule at all. When the community denies of someone that he is following certain rules, it excludes him from various transactions such as the one between the grocer and customer. It indicates that it cannot rely on his behavior in such transactions.

We can restate this in terms of *inversion* of a conditional. For example, It is important to our concept of causation that we accept some conditional as: "If events of type A cause events of type B, and if an event e of type A occurs, then an event e' of type B must follow." So put, it appears that acceptance of the conditional commits us to a belief in a nexus so that, given that the causal connections between event types obtains, the occurrence of the first event e necessitates, that an event e' of type B must obtain. Humeans of course deny the existence of such a nexus; how do they read the conditional? Essentially they concentrate on the assertability conditions of a contrapositive form of this conditional. It's not that any antecedent conditions necessitate that some event e' must take place; rather the conditional commits us, whenever we know that an event e of type A occurs and is not followed by an event of type B, to deny that there is a causal connection between the two event types.

Although a conditional is equivalent to its contrapositive, concentration on the contrapositive reverses our priorities. Instead of seeing causal connections as primary, from which we see observed regularities 'flow', the Humean instead sees the regularity as primary, and looking at the matter contrapositively, observes that we withdraw a causal hypothesis when the corresponding regularity has definite counter-instances.

A similar inversion is used in the present instance. It's essential to our concept of a rule that we maintain some such conditional as "If Jones means addition by '+'; then if he is asked for '68 + 57', he will reply '125'". The conditional as stated makes it appear that some mental state obtains in Jones that guarantees his performance of a particular addition, just what the skeptical argument denies. Wittgenstein's picture of the true situation concentrates on the contrapositive, and on justification conditions. If Jones does not come out with '125' when asked about '68 + 57', we cannot assert that he means addition by '+'. Of course this isn't strictly true because our formulation of the conditional is overly loose; other conditions must be added to the antecedent to make it true.

The fact remains that if we ascribe Jones to the conventional concept of addition, we do not expect him to exhibit a pattern of bizarre, quus-like behavior. By such a conditional we do not mean that any state of Jones guarantees his correct behavior. Rather, by asserting such a conditional we commit ourselves, if in the future Jones heaves bizarrely enough, no longer to persist in our assertion that he is following the convention rules of addition.

The rough conditional thus expresses a restriction on the community's game of attributing to one of its members the grasping of a certain concept: If the individual in question no longer conforms to what the community would do in these circumstances, the community can no longer attribute the concept to him. 

It is in such a description of the game of concept attribution that Wittgenstein's skeptical solution consists. It provides both conditions under which we are justified in attributing concepts to others and an account of the utility of the game in our lives. In terms of this account we can discuss briefly three of Wittgenstein's key concepts.
1. *Agreement.* The entire 'game' we have described - that the community attributes a concept to an individual so long as he exhibits sufficient conformity, under test circumstances, to the behavior of the community - would lose its point outside a community that generally agrees in its practices. If one person, when asked to compute '68 + 57' answered '125', another '5', and another '13', if there was no general agreement in the community responses, the game of attributing concepts to individuals as described could not exist. On Wittgenstein's conception, agreement is essential for our game of ascribing rules and concepts to each other.
2. *Form of life.* The set of responses in which we agree, and the way they interweave with our activities is our form of life. Beings who agreed in consistently giving bizarre quus-like responses would share in another form of life. By definition, such another form of life would be bizarre and incomprehensible to us. However, if we can imagine the abstract possibility of another form of life, the members of a community sharing such a quus-like form of life could play the game of attributing rules and concepts to each other as we do. Someone would be said in such a community, to follow a rule, as long as he agrees in his responses with the quus-like responses produced by the members of that community. Our license to say of each other that we mean addition by '+' is part of a language game that sustains itself only because of the brute fact that we generally agree. Nothing about grasping concepts guarantees that it will not break down tomorrow. The rough uniformity in our arithmetical behavior may or may not some day be given an explanation on the neurophysiological level, but such an explanation is not here in question.
3. *Criteria.* The exact interpretation and exegesis of Wittgenstein's concept of a criterion has been subject of much discussion among students of Wittgenstein's later work. Criteria played a fundamental role in his philosophy of mind. Often the necessity of criteria for mental concepts has been taken as a fundamental premise his private language arguments. Critics have sometimes argued that it constitutes an undefended and indefensible verificationist assumption. Wittgenstein's skeptical solution to his problems depends on agreement, and on checkability - on one person's ability to test whether another uses a term as he does. In our form of life, how does this agreement come about? In the case of a term like 'table', the situation is simple. A child who says 'table' when an adult sees a table in the area is said to have mastered the term 'table': he says "That's a table", based on his observations in agreement with the usage of adults, based on their observation. How does agreement emerge in the case of a term for a sensation, say 'pain'? It is not as simple as the case of 'table'. When will adults attribute to a child mastery of this avowal "I am in pain"? The child, if he learns the avowal correctly, will utter it when he feels pain and not otherwise. By analogy to the table case, it would appear that the adult should endorse this utterance if he, the adult, feels (his own? the child's?) pain. Of course we know this is not the case. Rather the adult will endorse the child's avowal if the child's behavior and, perhaps, the external circumstances surrounding the child, indicate that he is in pain. If the child generally avows pain under such appropriate behavioral and external circumstances and generally does not do so otherwise, the adult will say of him that he mastered the avowal, "I am in pain." Since in this case of discourse the pain and other sensations the adult's confirmation whether he agrees with the child's avowal is based on the adult's observations of the child's behavior and circumstances, the fact that such behavior and circumstances characteristic of pain exist is essential in this case to the working of Wittgenstein's skeptical solution. This then is what is meant by the remark, "An inner process stands in need of outward criteria." Roughly speaking, outward criteria for an inner process are circumstances observable in the behavior of an individual, which, when present, would lead others to agree with his avowals. If such individual generally makes his avowals under the right such circumstances, others will say of him that he has mastered the appropriate expressions. We have seen that it is a part of Wittgenstein's general view of the workings of all our expressions attributing concepts that others can confirm whether a subject's responses agree with their own. It should then be clear that the demand for 'outward criteria' is no verificationist or behaviorist premise that Wittgenstein takes for granted in his 'private language argument'. If anything, it is *deduced*. A skeptical problem is posed, and a skeptical solution is given. The solution turns on the idea that each person who claims to be following a rule can be checked by others. Others in the community can check whether the putative rule follower is or is not giving particular responses that they endorse, that agree with their own. The way they check this is, in general, a primitive part of the language game; it need not operate the way it does in the case of 'table'.  'Outward criteria' for sensations such as pain are simply the way this general requirement of our game of attributing concepts to others works out in the special case of sensations.

The model of the way agreement operates with respect to a word like 'table' is a simple one. It is tempting to suppose that this model ought to be a general one, and that if it doesn't apply to the case of 'pain' we must conclude that in some sense the adult can never really confirm the correctness of the child's use of "I am in pain." Wittgenstein's suggestion is that there cannot and need not be such a demand based on generalizing the use of 'table'. No *a priori* paradigm of the way concepts ought to be applied governs all forms of life, or even our own form of life. Our game of attributing concepts to others depends on agreement. It just so happens that in the case of ascribing sensation language, this agreement operates in part through 'outward criteria' for first person avowals. No further justification for this procedure is required, it's simply a given as how we achieve agreement here.

Lets summarize the 'private language argument' as it is presented here
1. We all suppose that our language expresses concepts, 'pain', 'plus', 'red', in such a way that once I 'grasp' the concept, all future applications of it are determined. In fact, it seems that no matter what is in my mind at a given time, I am free in the future to interpret it in different ways. For example, I could follow the skeptic and interpret 'plus' as 'quus'. In particular, this point applies if I direct my attention to a sensation and name it; nothing I have done determines future applications. Wittgenstein's skepticism about the determination of future usage by past contents of my mind is analogous to Hume's skepticism about determine of the future by past (causally and inferentially).
2. The paradox can be resolved only by a 'skeptical solution of these doubts', in Hume's classic sense. This means we must give up the attempt to find any fact about me in virtue of which I mean 'plus' rather than 'quus', and must then go on in a certain way. Instead, we must consider how we actually use:
	1. The categorical assertion that an individual is following a given rule
	2. The conditional assertion that "if an individual follows such and such a rule, he must do so and so on a given occasion". 
   That is to say, we must look at the circumstances under which these assertions are introduced into discourse, and their role and utility in our lives.
3. As long as we consider a single individual in isolation, all we can say is this: An individual often does have the experience of being confident that he 'got' a certain rule. It's an empirical fact that after that experience individuals often are disposed to give responses in concrete cases with complete confidence that proceeding this way is 'what was intended'. We cannot, however, get any further in explaining on this basis the use of the conditions in (2) above. Dispositionally speaking the subject is determined to respond in a certain way to a given addition problem. Such a disposition, together with the appropriate feeling of confidence could be present, however even if he weren't really following a rule at all, or even if he were doing the 'wrong thing'. The justificatory element of our use of conditionals in (2) is unexplained.
4. If we take into account the fact that the individual is in a community, the picture changes and the role of assertions in (2) become apparent. When the community accepts a particular condition, it accepts its contraposed form: the failure of an individual to come up with the particular responses the community regards as right leads the community to suppose that he isn't following the rule. On the other hand, if an individual passes enough tests, the community accepts him as a rule follower, thus enabling him to engage in certain types of interactions with them that depend on their reliance on his responses. Note the solution depends on how the assertions in (2) are introduced into our language, it does not give conditions for these statements to be true.
5. The success of the practices in (3) depends on the brute empirical fact that we agree with each other in our responses. Given the skeptical argument in (1), this success cannot be explained by 'the fact that we all grasp the same concepts'.
6. Just as Hume thought he had demonstrated that the causal relation between two events is unintelligible unless they are subsumed under a regularity, so Wittgenstein thought that the considerations in (2) and (3) above showed that all talk of an individual following rules has reference to him as a member of a community, as in  (3). In particular, for the conditionals in (2) to make sense, the community must be able to judge whether an individual is indeed following a given rule in particular applications, i.e., whether his responses agree with their own.

A few concluding points regarding the argument ought to be noted. First, a private language is defined as a language that is logically impossible for anyone else to understand. The private language argument is taken to argue against the possibility of a private language in this sense. What is really denied is what might be called the 'private model' of rule following, that the notion of a person following a given rule is to be analyzed simply in terms of facts about the rule follower and the rule follower alone, without reference to his membership in a wider community. The impossibility of private language in the sense just defined does follow from the incorrectness of the private model for language and rules, since the rule following in a 'private language' could only be analyzed by a private model, but the incorrectness of the private model is more basic, since it applies to all rules.

Does this mean that Robinson Crusoe, isolated on an island, cannot be said to follow any rules? Kripke doesn't see how this follows. What does follow is that if we think of Crusoe as following rules, we are taking him into our community and applying our criteria for rule following to him. The falsity of the private model need not mean that a physically isolated individual cannot be said to follow rules; rather than an individual, *considered in isolation*, cannot be said to do so. Remember that Wittgenstein's theory is one of assertability conditions. Our community can assert of any individual that he follows a rule if he passes the tests for rule following applied to any member of the community.

Wittgenstein's theory should not be confused with a theory that, for any m and n, the value of the function we mean by 'plus', is by definition the value that nearly all the linguistic community would give as the answer. Such a theory would be a theory of the truth conditions of such assertions. The theory would assert that 125 is the value of the function meant for given arguments if and only if '125' is the response nearly everyone would give, given these arguments. Thus the theory would be a social, or community-wide, version of the dispositional theory, and would be open to at least some of the same criticisms as the original form.

Wittgenstein has no theory of truth conditions for the correctness of one response rather that another to a new addition problem. Rather he points out that each of us automatically calculates new addition problems; that the community feels entitled to correct a deviant calculation; that in practice such deviation is rare, and so on. Wittgenstein thinks that these observations about sufficient conditions for justified assertions are enough to illuminate the role and utility in our lives of assertion about meaning and determination of new answers. What follows form these assertability conditions is not that the answer everyone gives to an addition problem is, by definition, the correct one, but rather the platitude that, if everyone agrees upon a certain answer, then no one will feel justified in calling the answer was wrong.