Wittgenstein says,
> "this was our paradox: no course of action could be determined by a rule, because every course of action can be made out to accord with the rule."

Kripke will attempt to develop the paradox in question. The problem may be regarded as a new form of philosophical skepticism.

The relevant skeptical problem applies to all meaningful uses of language, but the problem will be developed initially with respect to a mathematical example.

English speakers use the world "plus" and the symbol "$+$" to denote a well-known mathematical function, addition. The function is defined for all pairs of positive integers. By means of my external symbolic representation and my internal mental representation, I grasp the rule for addition.

One point is crucial to one's grasp of this rule. Although one has computed only finitely many sums in the past, the rule determines my answer for indefinitely many new sums that I have never previously considered. This is the whole point of the notion that in learning to add one grasps a rule: the past intentions regarding addition determine a unique answer for indefinitely many new cases in the future.

Suppose for example, that "$68 + 57$" is a computation that I have never performed before. I perform the computation, obtaining the answer "$125$ and I'm confident this is the correct answer. It is correct both in the arithmetical sense that $125$ is the sum of $68$ and $57$, and in the metalinguistic sense that "plus" denoted a function which, when applied to the numbers I called "$68$" and "$57$" yields the value $125$.

Now suppose I encounter a bizarre skeptic. This skeptic questions my certainty about my answer in the metalinguistic sense. Perhaps, he suggests, as I used the term "plus" in the past the answer I intended for "$68 + 57$" should've been "$5$". Of course this suggestion is obviously insane.

He says if I'm so confident that, as I used the symbol "$+$" my intention was that "$68 + 57$" should turn out to denote $125$, this cannot be because I explicitly gave myself instructions that $125$ is the result of performing the addition in this particular instance. By hypothesis, I did no such thing.  The idea is that, in this new instance, I should apply the very same function or rule that I applied so many times in the past. But who is to say what function this was? In the past I gave myself only a finite number of examples instantiating this function. All, we have supposed, involved numbers smaller than $57$. So perhaps in the past I used "plus" and "$+$" to denote a function which I call "quus" and symbolize by "$\oplus$". It's defined by: $$\begin{align}x \oplus y &= x+ y&\text{if }x, y < 57\\&=5 &\text{otherwise}\end{align}$$
Who is to say that this is not the function I previously meant by "$+$"?

The skeptic claims that I am now misinterpreting my own previous usage. By "plus", I always meant quus. Now, under the influence of some insane frenzy, or a bout of LSD, I have come to misinterpret my own previous usage.

Ridiculous but the skeptic's hypothesis is not logically impossible. To see this, assume the common sense hypothesis that by "$+$" I did mean addition. Then it would be *possible* that under the influence of a momentary high I should misinterpret all my past uses of the plus sign as symbolizing the quus function, and proceed in conflict with my linguistic intentions to compute 68 plus 57 as 5. 

If this is false there must be some fact about my past usage that can be cited to refute it. For although the hypothesis is wild, it does not seem to be [[Kinds of Truths|a priori]] impossible.

The basic point is this. Ordinarily, I suppose that in computing "$68 + 57$" as I do, I do not simply make an unjustified leap in the dark. I follow directions I previously gave myself that uniquely determine that in this new instance I should say "$125$". What are these directions? By hypothesis, I never explicitly told myself that I should say "125" in this very instance. Nor can I say that I should simply 'do the same thing I always did' if this means 'compute according to the rule exhibited by my previous examples.' That rule could just as well have been the rule for quaddition (the quus function) as for addition. The idea that in fact quaddition is what I mean dramatizes the problem.

The challenge posed by the skeptic takes two forms.
1. He questions whether there is any fact that I meant plus, not quus, that will answer his skeptical challenge.
2. He questions whether I have any reason to be so confident that now I should answer '125' rather than '5'.

The two forms of the challenge are related. I'm confident that I should answer 125 because I'm confident that this answer also accords with what I *meant*.

Neither the accuracy of my computation nor of my memory is under dispute. So it ought to be agreed that *if* I meant plus, then unless I wish to change my usage, I am justified in answering "125" and not "5".

An answer the skeptic must satisfy two conditions.
1. It must give an account of what fact it is about my mental state that constitutes my meaning plus, not quus.
2. It must, in some sense, show how I am justified in giving the answer "125" to "$68 + 57$".

The ground rules for our formulation of the problem should be made clear. For the skeptic to converse with me at all, we must have a common language. So I'm supposing that skeptic is no questioning my *present* use of the word "plus"; he agrees that according to my present usage "67 plus 57" denotes 125. He also conducts the entire debate with me in my language as I *presently* use it. He merely questions whether my present usage agrees with my past usage, whether I'm presently conforming to my *previous linguistic intentions*.

The problem is not "How do I know that 68 plus 57 is 128", but rather "How do I know that '68 + 57', as I meant plus in the past, should denote 125?" If the word plus as I used in the past denoted the quus function not the plus function, then my past intention was such that, asked for the value I should have replied 5.

The problem is put in this way to avoid confusing questions about whether the discussion is taking place "both inside and outside language" in some illegitimate sense. The skeptic assumes we agree in our present use of the world plus: we both use it to denote addition. He does not initially deny or doubt that addition is a genuine function nor does he deny that we can speak of it. Rather he asks why I now believe that by "plus" in the *past* I meant addition rather than quaddition. If you meant the former, then to accord with my previous usage I should say "125", If you meant the latter you should say "5".

This exposition differs from Wittgenstein's original formulation in taking greater care to make explicit a distinction between use and mention, and between questions about present and past usage.

The problem repeated: The skeptic doubts whether any instructions I gave myself in the past compel or justify the answer "125" rather than "5". He puts the challenge in terms of skeptical hypothesis about a change in my usage. Perhaps when I used the term "plus" in the past, I always meant quus: by hypothesis I never gave myself any explicit directions that were incompatible with such a supposition.

If the skeptic is right, the concepts of meaning and of intending one function rather than another will make no sense. For the skeptic holds that no fact about my past history, nothing that was ever in my mind or in my external behavior, established that I meant plus rather than quus. If this is correct, there can of course be no fact about which function I Mean, and if there can be no fact about which particular function I meant in the past, there can be none in the present either. But before we pull the rug out from under our own feet, we begin by speaking as if the notion that at present we mean a certain function by 'plus' is unquestioned and unquestionable. Only past usages are to be questioned. Otherwise, we'll be unable to formulate our problem.

Another important rule is that there are no limitations, in particular, no behaviorist limitations on the facts that may be cited to answer the skeptic. The evidence is not to be confined to that available to an external observer who can observe my overt behavior but not my internal mental state. It's interesting if nothing in my external behavior could show whether I meant plus or quus, but something about my inner state could. But the problem here is more radical.

No hostility to the inner is to be assumed, it is also to be argued as a conclusion. So whatever "looking into my mind" may be, the skeptic asserts that even if God were to do it, he still could not determine that I meant addition by "plus".

To return to the skeptic. The skeptic argues that when I answered '125' to the problem '$68 + 57$', my answer was an unjustified leap in the dark; my past mental history is equally compatible with the hypothesis that I meant quus, and therefore should have said '5'. When asked for the answer to '$68 + 57$', I unhesitatingly produced '125', but it would seem that if previously I never performed this computation explicitly I might just have answered '5'.

An obvious response is that our problem arises only because of a ridiculous model of the instruction I gave myself regarding 'addition'. Surely, I did not merely give myself some finite number of examples from which I am supposed to extrapolate the whole table. ("Let '$+$' be the function instantiated by the following examples: ..."). No doubt infinitely many functions are compatible with that. Rather I learned a *rule* which determines how addition is to be continued. What was the rule? To take it in its most primitive form: suppose we wish to add $x$ and $y$. Take a huge bunch of marbles. First count out $x$ marbles in one heap. Then count out $y$ marbles in another. Put the two heaps together and count out the number of marbles in the union thus formed. The result is $x+y$. This set of directions I explicitly gave myself at some earlier time. It's engraved on my mind as on a slate. It's incompatible with the hypothesis that I meant quus. It is this set of directions, not the finite list of particular additions I performed in the past, that justified and determines my present response. The actual algorithm for addition is more sophisticated and practically applicable than the primitive one just described, but there's no difference in principle.

Despite the initial plausibility of this objection, the skeptic's response is all too obvious. True, if 'count' as I used the word in the past referred to the act of counting (and my other past words are correctly interpreted in the standard way), then 'plus' must have stood for addition. But I applied 'count', like 'plus' to only finitely many past cases. Thus the skeptic can question my present interpretation of my past usage of 'count' as he did with 'plus'. In particular, he can claim that by 'count' I formerly meant 'quount', where to 'quount' is a heap is to count it in the ordinary sense, unless the heap was formed as the union of two heaps, one of which has 57 or more items, in which case one must automatically give the answer '5'. It is clear that if in the past 'counting' meant quounting, and if I follow the rule for 'plus' that was quoted so triumphantly to the skeptic, I must admit that '68 + 57' must yield '5'. This point is perfectly general: if 'plus' is explained in terms of 'counting', a non-standard interpretation of the latter will yield a non-standard interpretation of the former.

The same objection scotches a related suggestion. It might be urged that the quus function is ruled out as an interpretation of '$+$' because it fails to satisfy some of the laws I accept for '$+$' (For example, it's not associative; we could have defined it so as not even to be commutative). One might even observe that one the natural numbers, addition is the only function that satisfies certain laws that I accept - "the 'recursion equations" for $+:$  $\forall x(x + 0 = x)$ and $\forall x \forall y (x + y' = (x + y)')$ where stroke indicates successor; the equations are sometimes called a 'definition' of addition. The problem is that the other signs used in the laws (the universal quantifiers, the equality sign) have been applied in only a finite number of instances, and they can be given non-standard interpretations that will fit non-standard interpretations of '$+$. For example $\forall x$ might mean for every $x<h$, where $h$ is some upper bound to the instances where universal instantiation has hitherto been applied, and similarly for equality. In any event the objection is overly sophisticated. Many of us who aren't mathematicians use the '$+$' perfectly well in ignorance of any explicitly formulated laws of the type cited. Yet surely we use '$+$' with the usual determinate meaning nonetheless. What justifies us applying the function as we do?

Back the counting heap, it's pointless to protest that I intended the result of counting a heap to be independent of its composition in terms of sub-heaps. Let me have said this to myself as explicitly as possible: the skeptic will smiling reply that once again I'm misinterpreting my past usage and that actually 'independent' formerly means *quindependent*, where 'quindependent' means...

This is simply an expounding of Wittgenstein's well-known remarks about "a rule for interpreting a rule". It is tempting to answer the skeptic by appealing from one rule to another more 'basic' rule. But the skeptical move can be repeated at the more 'basic' level also. Eventually the process must stop, and I am left with a rule which is completely unreduced to any other. How can I justify my present application of such a rule when a skeptic could easily interpret it so as to yield any of an indefinite number of other results? It seems I apply the rule *blindly*.

Although an intelligence tester may suppose that there is only one possible continuation to the sequence $2, 4, 6, 8, ...$ mathematical and philosophical sophisticates know that an indefinite number of rules (even rules stated in terms of mathematical functions as conventional as ordinary polynomials) are compatible with any such finite initial segment. So if the tester urges me to respond, after $2, 4, 6, 8, ...,$ with the unique appropriate next number, the proper response is that no such unique number exists, nor is there any unique (rule determined) infinite sequence that continues the given one.

The problem can then be put this way: Did I myself, in the directions for the future that I gave myself regarding '$+$', really differ from the intelligence tester? True, I may not merely stipulate that '$+$' is to be a function instantiated by a finite number of computations. In addition, I may give myself directions for the further computation of '$+$', stated in terms of other functions and rules. In turn, I may give myself directions for the further computation of these functions and rules, and so on. Eventually, however, the process must stop, with 'ultimate' functions and rules that I have stipulated for myself only by a *finite* number of examples, just as the intelligence test.

If so, is not my procedure as arbitrary as that of the man who guesses the continuation of the intelligence test? In what sense is my actual computation procedure, following an algorithm that yields '125', more justified by my past instructions than an alternative procedure that would have resulted in '5'? Am I not simply following an unjustifiable impulse?

These problems apply throughout language and are not confined to mathematical examples. I think that I have learned the term 'table' in such a way that it will apply to indefinitely many future items. Can I answer the skeptic who supposed that by 'table' in the past I meant *tabair*, where a 'tabair' is anything that is a table not found at the base of the Eiffel Tower, or a chair found there?

Most important for the 'private language' argument, the point of course applies to predicates of sensations, visual impressions, and the like, as well: "*How do I know* that in working out the series $+2$ I must write "20,004, 20,006" and not "200,004, 20,008"? The question: "How do I know that this color is 'red?" is similar."

The passage illustrates a central thesis of this essay: that Wittgenstein regards the fundamental problems of the philosophy of mathematics and of the 'private language argument', the problem of sensation language, as at root identical, stemming from his paradox.

It has been supposed that all I need to do to determine my use of the word 'green' is to have an image, a sample, of green that I bring to mind whenever I apply the word in the future. When I use this to justify my application of 'green' to a new object, should not the skeptical problem be obvious to any reader of Goodman? Perhaps by 'green', in the past I meant *grue*, and the color image, which indeed was grue, was meant to direct me to apply the word 'green' to *grue* objects always. If the *blue* object before me is now grue, then it falls in the extension of 'green', as I meant in the past. It is of no help to suppose that in the past I stipulated that 'green' was to apply to all and only those things 'of the same color as' the sample. The skeptic can reinterpret 'same color' as same *schmolor*, where things have the same schmolor if...

The problem may seem epistemological at first, how can anyone know which of these I meant? Give, however, that everything in my mental history is compatible both with the conclusion that I meant plus and with the conclusion that I meant quus, it is clear that the skeptical challenge is not really an epistemological one. It purports to show that nothing in my mental history of past behavior, not even what an omniscient God would know, could establish whether I meant plus or quus. But then it appears to follow that there was no *fact* about me that constituted my having meant plus rather than quus. How could there be, if nothing in my internal mental history of external behavior will answer the skeptic who supposed that in fact I meant quus? If there was no such thing as my meaning plus rather than quus in the past, neither can there be any such thing in the present. There can be no fact as to what I mean by 'plus', or any other word at any time. The provisional concession was indeed fictive.

This, then, is the skeptical paradox. When I respond in one way rather than another to such a problem as '$68 + 57$', I can have no justification for one response rather than another. Since the skeptic who supposed that I meant quus cannot be answered, there is no fact about me that distinguishes between my meaning plus and my meaning quus. Indeed, there is no fact about me that distinguishes between my meaning a determine function by 'plus' and my meaning nothing at all.

It seems that the entire idea of meaning vanishes into thin air.

Let's discuss a common response. The fallacy in the argument that not fact about me constitutes my meaning plus lies in the assumption that such a fact must consist in an *occurrent* mental state. Indeed the skeptical argument shows that my entire occurrent past mental history might have been the same whether I meant plus or quus, but all this shows is that the fact that I meant plus is to be analyzed *dispositionally*, rather than in terms of occurrent mental states.

The dispositional analysis I've heard proposed is simple. To mean addition by '$+$ is to be disposed, when asked for any sum '$x + y$ to give the sum of $x$ and $y$ as the answer; to mean quus is to be disposed when queried about any arguments, to respond with their *quum*. True, my actual thoughts and responses in the past do not differentiate between the plus and the quus hypotheses; but, even in the past, there were dispositional facts about me that did make such a differentiation. 

To say that in fact I meant plus in the past is to say that had I been queried about '68 + 75', I would have answered '125'. By hypothesis I was not in fact asked, but the disposition was present none the less.

This reply ought to appear to be misdirected. The skeptic created an air of puzzlement as to my justification for responding '125' rather than '5' to the addition problem as queried. Does the suggested reply advance matters? How does it *justify* my choice of '125'? What it says is: "'125' is the response you are disposed to give, and it also would have been your response in the past." Well and good, I know that '125' is the response I'm disposed to give, and maybe it is helpful to be told as a matter of brute fact that I would have given the same response in the past. How does any of this indicate that now or in the past '125' was an answer *justified* in terms of instructions I gave myself, rather than a mere jack-in-the-box unjustified and arbitrary response? I'm supposed to justify my present belief that I meant addition, not quaddition in terms of a hypothesis about my past dispositions, but why am I so sure that one particular hypothesis of this kind is correct, when all past thoughts can be construed either so that I meant plus or so that I meant quus?

Alternatively, is the hypothesis to refer to my *present* dispositions alone, which would hence give the right answer by definition?

Is not the dispositional view simply an equation of performance and correctness? Assuming determinism, even if I mean to denote *no* number theoretic function in particular by the sign '\*', then to the same extent as it is true for '+', it is true here that for any two arguments m and n, there is a uniquely determined answer p that I would give. The difference between this case and the case of the '+' function is that in the former case, but not in the latter, my uniquely determined answer can properly be called 'right' or 'wrong'. 

A dispositional account misconceives the skeptic's problem, to find a past fact that *justifies* my present response. As a candidate for a 'fact' that determines what I mean, it fails to satisfy the basic condition on such a candidate, stated above, that it should *tell* me what I ought to do in each new instance.

There are some more problems with the view. First, lets state the simple dispositional analysis. It gives a criterion that will tell me what number theoretic function $\phi$ I mean by a binary function symbol '$f$', namely: The referent $\phi$ of '$f$' is the unique binary function $\phi$ such that I am disposed, if queried about '$f(m, n)$', where '$m$' and '$n$' are numerals denoting particular numbers $m$ and $n$, to reply '$p$', where '$p$' is a numeral denoting $\phi(m, n)$. The criterion is meant to enable us to 'read off' which function I mean by a given function symbol from my disposition. The case of addition and quaddition above would simply be special cases of such a scheme of definition.

The dispositional theory attempts to avoid the problem of the finiteness of my actual past performance by appealing to a disposition. In doing so, it ignores an obvious fact: not only my actual performance, but also the totality of my dispositions, is finite. It isn't true that if queried about the sum of any two numbers, no matter how large, I will reply with their actual sum, for some pair of numbers are simply too large for my mind to grasp. When given such sums, I may shrug my shoulders for lack of comprehension; I may even, if the numbers involved are large enough, die of old age before the questioner completes his question.'

Let 'quaddition' be redefined so as to be a function which agrees with addition for all pairs of numbers small enough for me to have any disposition to add them, and let it diverge from addition thereafter (say, it is 5). Now the skeptic proposes the hypothesis that I meant quaddition in the new sense. A dispositional account will be impotent to refute him. As before there are infinitely many candidates the skeptic can propose for the role of quaddition.

One may respond that this trouble arises solely from too crude a notion of disposition: *ceteris paribus*, I surely will respond with the sum of any two numbers when queried. And *ceteris paribus* notions of dispositions, not crude and literal notions, are the ones standardly used in philosophy and in science.

Maybe, but how should we flesh out the *ceteris paribus* clause? Perhaps as something like: if my brain is stuffed with sufficient extra matter to grasp large enough numbers, and if it were given enough capacity to perform such a large addition, and if my life were prolonged enough, then give an addition problem involving two large numbers, $m$ and $n$, I would respond with their sum, and not with the result according to some quus-like rule.

But how can we have confidence in this? What if the result of such experimentation led one to behave according to a quus-like rule. The outcome is obviously indeterminate, failing further specification, and even with such specifications it's highly speculative.

Of course what the *ceteris paribus* clause really means is something like this: If I somehow were to be given the means to carry out my intentions with respect to numbers that presently are too long for me to add, and if I were to carry out these intentions, then if queried about 'm + n' for some big m and n, I would respond with their sum and not with their quum.

Such a counterfactual is true but it's of no help. It presupposed a prior notion of my having an intention to mean one function  rather than another by '$+$'. It's in virtue of a fact of this kind about me that the conditional is true, but the skeptic is challenging the existence of such a fact. Granted that I mean addition by '+', then of course if I were to act in accordance with my intentions I would respond with their sum, but equally, granted that I mean quaddition if I were to act in accordance with my intentions, I would respond with the quum.

To recapitulate: If the dispositionalist attempts to define which function I meant as the function determined by the answer I am disposed to give for arbitrary large argument, he ignores the fact that my dispositions extend to only finitely many cases. If he tries to appeal to my responses under idealized conditions that overcome this finiteness, he will succeed only if the idealization includes a specification that I will still respond, under these idealized conditions, according to the infinite table of the function I actually meant. But then the circularity of the procedure is evident. The idealized dispositions are determinate only because it is already settled which function I meant.

There's another issue. Most of us have dispositions to make mistakes. Some may forget to carry when asked to add certain numbers. Normally, we say that such people have made a *mistake*. But the dispositionalist cannot say this. According to him, the function someone means is to be read off from his dispositions; it cannot be presupposed in advance which function is meant. In the present instance a certain unique function, call it skaddition, corresponds in its table exactly to the subject's dispositions, including his disposition to make mistakes. So, where common sense holds that the subject means the same addition function as everyone else but systematically makes computation mistakes, the dispositionalist seems forced to hold that the subject makes no computational mistakes, but means a non-standard function, skaddition, by '+'.

The difficulty cannot be surmounted by a ceteris paribus clause, by a clause excluding 'noise', or by a distinction between 'competence' and 'performance.' No doubt a disposition to give the true sum in response to each addition problem is part of my competence, if by this we mean simply that such answers accord with the rule I intended. But a disposition to make a mistake is simply a disposition to *give an answer other than the one that accords with the function I meant*. To presuppose this concept in the present discussion is viciously circular.

The dispositional theory, as stated, assumes that which function I meant is determined by my dispositions to compute its values in particular cases. Since dispositions cover only a finite segment of the total function, and since they may deviate from its true values, two individuals may agree on their computations in particular cases even though they are actually computing different functions. Hence, the dispositional view is not correct.

Some may appeal to a machine that computes the relevant function. If I built such a machine, it will simply grind out the right answer in any particular case. The answer that the machine would give is the answer I intended.

If a technician makes the machine for me, the skeptic can ask legitimately whether the technician has performed his task correctly. Suppose however that I'm fortunate enough to be such an expert that I have the technical facility required to embody my own intentions in a computing machine, and I state that the machine is *definitive* of my own intentions.

Now the word 'machine' may refer to any one of various things. It may refer to a machine *program* that I draw up, embodying my intentions as the operations of the machine. Then the exact same problem arises for the program as the original symbol '+': the skeptic can feign to believe that the program, too, ought be interpreted in a quus like manner. To say a program is not something that I wrote down on a paper, but an abstract mathematical object gets us no further. We can then ask, what program in the sense of abstract mathematical object corresponds to the 'program' I have written on paper in accordance with the way I meant.

Finally, I may build a concrete machine made of metal and gears or transistors and wires, and declare that it embodies the function I intend by '$+$': the values that it gives are the values of the function I intend. There are several problems with this.

1. Even if I say that the machine embodies the function in this sense, I must do so in terms of instructions that tell me how to interpret the machine. Further, I must declare explicitly that the function always takes values as given, in accordance with the chosen code, by the machine. But then the skeptic is free to interpret all these instructions in a non-standard way. Waiving this problem, I cannot really insist that the values of the function are given by the machine. The machine is a finite object, accepting only finitely many numbers as input and yielding only finitely many outputs, others are simply too big. Indefinitely many programs extend the actual finite behavior of the machine. Usually this is ignored because the designer of the machine intended it to fulfill just one program, but in the present context such an approach to the intentions of the designer simply gives the skeptic his wedge to interpret in a non-standard way. Also in practice it hardly is likely that I really intend to entrust the values of a function to the operation of a physical machine, even for that finite portion of the function for which the machine can operate. Actual machines can malfunction. How is it determined when a malfunction occurs? By reference to the program of the machine as intended by its designer, not simply by reference to the machine itself. Depending on the intent of the designer, any particular phenomenon may or may not count as a machine 'malfunction'. A programmer with suitable intentions might even have intended to make use of the fact that wires melt or gears slip, so that a machine that is 'malfunctioning' for me is behaving perfectly for him. Then as before the skeptic can concentrate his objections on the program.
2. We can appeal to the finitude of the computer
3. We can appeal to the possibility of malfunction

2 and 3 are obvious parallels to the two corresponding objections to the dispositional account.

The moral here is relevant to other areas of concern. Suppose I do mean addition by '+'. What is the relation of this supposition to the question how I will respond to the problem '68 + 57'? The dispositionalist gives a descriptive account of this relation. But this is not the proper account of the relation, which is normative, not descriptive. The point is not that, if I meant addition by '+', I will answer '125', but that, if I intend to accord with my past meaning of '+', I should answer '125'. Computational error, finiteness of my capacity, and other factors may lead me not to be disposed to respond as i should, but if so, I have not acted in accordance with my intentions. The relation of meaning and intention to further action is *normative*, not *descriptive*.

Let's deal with another suggestion. Let no one under the influence of too much philosophy science, suggest that the hypothesis that I meant plus it to be preferred as the *simplest* hypothesis. 

The argument here is not that simplicity is relative, or that it is hard to define, or that a Martian might find the quus function simpler than the plus function. Such replies may have merit, but the real trouble with the appeal to simplicity is more basic.

Such an appeal must be based either on a misunderstanding of the skeptic problem, or of the role of simplicity considerations, or both. Recall that the skeptical problem was not merely epistemic. The skeptic argues that there is no fact as to what I meant, whether plus or quus. Simplicity considerations can help us decide between competing hypotheses, but they obviously can never tell us what the competing hypotheses are. If we do not understand what two hypotheses *state*, what does it mean to say that one is 'more probable' because it is 'simpler'? If the two competing hypotheses are not genuine hypotheses, no simplicity considerations will make them so.

Suppose there are two conflicting hypotheses about electrons, both confirmed by the experimental data. If we are realists, we will view these assertions as making factual assertions about some 'reality' about electrons. God would have no need for experimental evidence or simplicity considerations to decide between hypotheses. We, who lack Gods capacities, must rely on indirect evidence to decide between hypotheses. If two competing hypotheses are indistinguishable, then we must fall back on simplicity considerations. A being who could see facts about electrons would have no need to invoke simplicity considerations, he would simply directly perceive the relevant facts.

Now Wittgenstein's skeptic argues that he knows of no fact about an individual that could constitute his state of meaning plus rather than quus. Against this claim simplicity considerations are irrelevant. Simplicity considerations would have been relevant against a skeptic who argued that the indirectness of our access to the facts of meaning and intention prevents us from ever knowing whether we mean plus or quus. But such merely epistemic skepticism is not in question. The skeptic does not argue that our own limitations of access to the facts prevent us from knowing something hidden. He claims that an omniscient being, with access to all available facts, still would not find any fact that differentiates between the plus and the quus hypotheses. And such a being would have no need for simplicity considerations.

Why not argue that "meaning addition by 'plus'" denotes an irreducible experience, with its own special *quale*, known directly to each of us by introspection?  Maybe I appear unable to reply to the skeptic just because the experience of meaning addition by 'plus' is as unique and irreducible as that of seeing yellow or feeling a headache, while the skeptic's challenge invites me to look for another fact or experience to which this can be reduced.

I referred to an introspectible experience because, since each of us knows immediately and with fair certainty that he means addition by 'plus', presumably the view in question assumes we know this in the same we know that we have headaches - by attending to the qualitative character of our own experiences. Presumably the experience of *meaning addition* has its own irreducible quality, as does that of feeling a headache.

This theory seems to be off target as an answer to the original challenge. The skeptic wanted to know why I was so sure that I ought to say '125' when asked about '68 + 57'. If I think the headache indicates that I ought to say '125', would there by anything about it to refute a skeptic's contention that on the contrary it indicates that I should say '5'? The idea that each of my inner states, including presumably, meaning what I do by 'plus' has its special discernibly quality like a headache is indeed one of the cornerstones of classical empiricism but it's very hard to see how the alleged introspectible quale could be relevant to the problem at hand.

It takes relatively little introspective acuteness to realize the dubiousness of the attribution of a special qualitative character to the 'experience' of meaning addition by 'plus'. Attend to what happened when I first learned to add. First, there may or may not have been a specifiable time, at which I suddenly felt that I had grasped the rule for addition. If there was not, it's very hard to see in what the suppositious special experience of my learning to add consisted. Even if there was a particular time at which I could have shouted "*Eureka*" in what did the attendant experience consist? Probably consideration of a few particular cases and a thought - "Now I've got it!" - or the like. Could just this be the content of an experience of 'meaning addition'? How would it have been different if I had meant quus? Suppose I perform a particular addition now, say '5 + 7'. Is there any special quality to the experience? Would it have been different if I had been trained in, and performed, the corresponding quaddition? How different indeed would the experience have been if I had performed the corresponding multiplication ('$5 \times 7$'), other than I would have responded automatically with a different answer?

Consider the case of reading. By reading we mean reading out loud what is written or printed and similar activities: we aren't concerned with understanding what is written however. Reading in this sense is a simple case of following a rule. Wittgenstein points out that a beginner, who reads laboriously spelling words out, may have an introspectible experience when he really reads, as opposed to pretending to 'read' a passage he has actually memorized in advance; but an experienced reader simply calls the words out and is aware of no special conscious experience of 'deriving' the words from the page.

Suppose a teacher is teaching a number of beginners to read. Some pretend, others occasionally get it right by accident, others have already learned to read. When has someone passed into the latter class? In general, there will not be an identifiable moment when this has happened: the teacher will judge of a given pupil that he has 'learned to read' if he passes tests for reading often enough. There may or may not be an identifiable moment when the pupil first felt, "Now I'm reading!" but the presence of such an experience is neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for the teacher to judge of him that he is reading.