Everyone is familiar with the sequence of even numbers: 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, and would know how to continue it. The sequence can be generated by following a simple rule: start with 2 as the first number in the sequence, and then add 2 to produce the next number of the sequence, and so on.

The performance of following this rule is trivial and yet there's something strange about it. If we ask where the sequence ends, we have to say it doesn't. There is no end.

That isn't all. Think of the transition from one number of the sequence to the next: when we take the step from 12 to 14, or from 14 to 16. If we are going to follow the rule we *have* to say 14 after 12; we *must* do it this way if we are to obey the rule. That's how we talk: we say *have to* and *must* but what do we mean?

Does it mean we find it physically impossible to say anything else? Obviously not, we could violate the rule and say 15 instead of 14. Does *must* mean we want to say 14? That doesn't sound right either, it surely isn't a case of wanting or not wanting. We have to say 14 because that's what the rule requires, but what does *the rule requires* mean? We know what it is for the government to require us to pay taxes but what is it for a *rule* to require something of us? As Wittgenstein put is, "You say you must; but cannot say what compels you".

But no we have two mysteries: the mystery of infinity and the mystery of rules, or what Wittgenstein called the "hardness of the logical *must*". We are not being imposed upon by physical necessity, rather we must do the thing in question if we are to conduct ourselves rightly. We can do something else, but then we do something wrongly. The necessity in play is like a moral necessity: it is to do with getting something right or wrong, and of behaving well or badly according to some standard embodied in the rule.

We shall therefore talk of the "normativity" of rules. The mystery of compulsion is thus the mystery of normativity.

If there is indeed something of a mystery about rules then it is a widespread one, because it will not just apply to number sequences: it will affect all comparable rules, and such rules are everywhere in our life.

In their various ways and under various conditions, they will all "require" something of us, and the requirement will typically apply to an open-ended and indeterminately large number of cases. If we want to understand rules in general we had better make sure we understand the clear-cut and simple cases, hence the example of the number sequence.

These lines of thought might make someone of a practical turn of mind impatient. It was admitted that following the rule "add 2" was trivially easy, so why raise these issues and ask these questions?

In this context the impatience takes the form of saying the mysterious character of rule following isn't mysterious at all: It is just how things are. It must be accepted as a plain matter of fact. Our attitude should be one of relaxed common sense.

Rules just do compel us, because if we are going to be consistent with the rule then we must do what it says on pain of violating the meaning of rule (all on the supposition that we are intending or meaning to follow it). In the case of the even sequence, it will be said that once we fix the interpretation of "two", "add", and "sequence", and the other relevant words then what we must do to follow the rule is completely determined. We are committed to saying 14 after 12. Both the compulsion and the endlessness of the rule cease to by mysterious according to this argument because they simply follow from what it is to mean something of this kind.

Wittgenstein characterizes it as follows:
> I feel that I have given the rule an interpretation before I have followed it; and that this interpretation is enough to *determine* what I have to do in order to follow it in the particular case.

Let's adopt this terminology and call this view *meaning determinism*. This is the claim that the compelling and infinite character of rules derive from the property called "meaning": i.e. the meaning of the rule itself and what is meant or intended by the rule follower.

Meaning determinism is an essential ingredient of a further position which will play a central role in the discussion to follow, namely individualism. This is one of the two fundamentally opposed approaches to rule following, the other being collectivism. 

Individualists do not deny that many rules are designed to regulate social interactions. The point they insist on is that rule following as such doesn't necessarily or always involve interacting with other people. They express this by saying that rule following is not "essentially social". Some activities are essentially social, e.g. marching in step or following fashion. The rule for generating number sequences, however, is not of this kind. The rule itself doesn't refer to people nor are other people involved in the following of it. We don't need other people to agree with us before we can be said to have got it right.

For the individualist someone could follow the sequence correctly even if everybody else disagreed or if nobody else was alive to reassure them or endorse their conclusions. Even the fact that we are taught makes no difference. The need for teachers is said to be just a contingency, a non-essential fact that could in principle be otherwise.

The justification for these individualist claims refers back to meaning determinism. It is based on the idea that rule following is made possible by our power to grasp the meaning of the concepts used in the rule. Once we have grasped them, then it is their meaning which guides or determines our behavior. Grasping a concept is an individual achievement.

Meaning determinism purports to give us a picture of how the individual is provided with standards of right and wrong for their rule following activity: they are implicit in the very meanings of concepts. Without meaning determinism the individualist would have no account of normativity.

Wittgenstein rejected meaning determinism. His theory was a form of collectivism and was simple in its general outline. It may be summed up in the following two propositions:
1. [[Rules as Institutions|Rules are social institutions]] or social customs or social conventions;
2. To follow a rule is therefore to participate in an institution and to adopt or conform to a custom or convention. As he put it: "To obey a rule, to make a report, to give an order, to play a game of chess, are *customs*"

This is what a rule is, and all it is. It follows that explanatory categories dealing exclusively with our individual cognitive abilities will not be adequate to explain the phenomenon. More than individual psychology is needed.

Can the notion of custom, convention, and institution tell us the whole story? Isn't it obvious that a sociological or collectivist approach of this kind can only account for *part* of what goes on when we follow a rule? It is indeed a matter of convention which rules we adopt, but surely once we adopt them, what counts as correctly following the rule is fixed by the rule itself. It may be a matter of convention that the game we call chess has the rules it does, but once they've been accepted it is their logical consequences which come into operation, determining which moves conform to, or violate, the rules of the game. If this objection is correct, the 'must' and 'have to' of rules do not have their source in human conventions and institutions, but in consistency of meaning, and hence in the logical property of rules.

Clearly this is just a re-affirmation of the ideas already labelled "meaning determinism". If a sociological approach is to be sustained, the presuppositions of meaning determinism must be met head on and replaced by a different conception of meaning. This is what Wittgenstein did: he developed an alternative account of meaning precisely for this purpose. The Wittgensteinian approach will be called *[[Meaning Finitism|meaning finitism]]*. It is no use assenting to the proposition that a rule is a convention, if 'convention' is just another word for a rule, and rules are then given the standard, uncritical analysis of common sense or the theory of meaning determinism. 

The most notable recent sociological reading is Saul Kripke's *[[Introduction to Kripke's Wittgenstein On Rules and Private Langauge|Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language]]*. Kripke expresses reservations about the truth of Wittgenstein's conclusions, but he has no doubt about the importance of his arguments, or their sociological character. We will carry Kripke's argument further, but it will differ in 5 ways.
1. Kripke does not fully bring to the surface Wittgenstein's finitist account of meaning. In particular, that account needs disentangling from certain themes Kripke chooses to emphasize, namely Wittgenstein's shift from a correspondence theory of truth to a more pragmatic assertion condition approach.
2. Kripke's formulation of Wittgenstein's argument contains a disconcerting and damaging ambiguity. The effect of the ambiguity is to make the sociological approach in general, and Wittgenstein's version in particular, look more vulnerable to individualist criticism than they really are.
3. Kripke's exposition also contains a fault of the opposite tendency to the previous one: it transmits rather than repairs some of the genuine shortcomings in Wittgenstein's analysis of rules, there are ways in which the analysis needs strengthening.
4. We will take up a hint dropped by Kripke in the very last footnote of his treatment of rules. He briefly compared Wittgenstein's argument to Ludwig von Mises' attack on the economics of socialism.
5. The final difference will be exploration of a further historical parallel that casts light on the current controversy between individualists and collectivists. We'll compare currently opposed positions with those taken up by David Hume and Thomas Reid, in their debate about the origin and character of the obligation to keep promises. Kripke already drew a parallel between Hume's skeptical approach to causation and Wittgenstein's approach to rules.

The immediate take is to set out clearly Wittgenstein's positive account of the processes underlying what we calling following a rule.