Wittgenstein said if we wanted to understand rule following we should look at how we learn to follow rules, and how we might teach someone a rule. The circumstances of teaching and learning will give us all we need.

How, then, do we teach someone to follow a rule, e.g. the rule for producing the sequence of numbers $2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12$, etc,?Clearly, we must first teach them to count. Then we must teach them to add, in particular, to add 2. We will show them what we want them to do and encourage them to imitate, saying things like 'right!' and 'good!' when they seem to be doing what we want, and 'no!' or 'wrong!' to hold them back. We will even say, 'You must do this' and 'You can't do that' and shape the learner's behavior by means of what Anscombe calls 'forcing modals' and 'stopping modals'. Initially these verbal formulations maybe accompanied by physically guiding the learner's hands or by physically restraining them until, in the course of learning, purely verbal instructions produce the desired effect.

This is all obvious, but Wittgenstein draws attention to a feature of the process which is easily overlooked. The number of illustrations and examples a teacher can offer a pupil must always be *finite*. By contrast, many of the rules being taught are 'infinite'. Learning the rule and how to follow it isn't, therefore, like learning the alphabet, which is just a finite list. In these infinite cases the pupil has always got to go on beyond the given examples, or be deemed capable of going on, before they can be said to have learned what the teacher is tying to convey.

In learning such rules there is always going to be the problem of taking the next step of moving from previously known cases to new cases. The problem of taking the new step is always with us. It's this problem, the move from past to new instances of concepts, on which Wittgenstein wanted us to focus. It is to be seen as problematic for any theory of rules, a proper account of rule following must focus on the analyst's attention on that step in the process, i.e.. the step to the next case.

Wittgenstein draws attention to the problem of the next by asking: how do I know what to do at *this* point? Confronting the the picture of meaning determinism, of the rule implicitly specifying what is to be done in advance, Wittgenstein posed the question: but how does that help me now?

It might be objected that teaching a rule doesn't always reduce to showing the learner a finite number of examples. Sometimes we instruct learners verbally, and if the would-be rule followers understand our instructions they will be able to follow the rule by following the instruction.

For example, someone might explain to us that the square of a number $n$ means $n \times n$, and is written $n^2$, instructed to produce the sequence $n^2$ starting at $1$ we would then write the sequence. We didn't do this on the basis of examples but through a verbal definition made up of words whose meanings are general and not confined to a finite number of cases. The reply to this objection will be obvious: we must first understand the words of the instruction or definition. If we ask how we learn these, we come back once again to examples. All learning therefore ultimately rests of finite number of examples, and this renders the problem of the move to the next step ineradicable.

To sustain the sense of the problematic character of the step-by-step movement in rule following Wittgenstein realized he had to root out alternative ways of glossing the process, i.e., ways that support meaning determinism. It's tempting to suppose that when a teacher is using examples to convey the meaning of a word, the teacher has something 'in mind', and the finite number of examples are just a fragmentary substitute for what is really meant. The argument goes, they will only have established an understanding when they can reach beyond all the examples. On this view, the source of understanding is qualitatively different in its nature from the examples themselves.

If the teacher is thinking of the rule for counting in twos, and this is what he's trying to teach, then he has an idea of something going on for ever. The idea of the rule doesn't confine itself to a finite number of cases. It refers to the infinite scope of the rule, but he cannot lay that before the pupil. So he contents himself with a poor second best.

Wittgenstein conceded this picture is natural but nevertheless rejected it. He said teachers don't know more than they can say or make explicit.

We are told that when we say 'and so on' we don't ourselves know more than 'and so on'. What does this mean? The point is that we cannot possibly conjure up in our mind all the cases to which the rule is 'meant' to apply. The content of our consciousness must be finite. But we might object that the words 'and so on' convey some meaning and refer to something.

In the place of this picture, which is just another manifestation of meaning determinism, Wittgenstein substituted a more down-to-earth account, using biological ideas. He said we should think of ourselves as having instinctive responses to the examples used in teaching. Given our biological make up, if we are shown three or four samples of a color, and perhaps some samples of other colors to define the boundary, then for many purposes we can be sent off to fetch an object of a color that matches it. We can learn the rule for 'red' in this way. This is possible because we instinctively generalize. Under certain conditions we spontaneously take ourselves to be encountering the same thing again which we 'recognize' in the sense of treating it as similar to previous instances of this kind. We don't need to have any 'criterion' or justification for deciding this is 'the *same*' again.: we just react in this way.

When we are confronted with a finite set of examples we do not extract from then any general idea, rather, we instinctively pass on to what strikes us as the next step or the next case. There is no rational basis for this, nor one that can ever be formulated in terms of propositions assented to by the rule follower. For Wittgenstein the bottom line of the explanation is not an ungrounded presupposition: it is an ungrounded way of acting. We go on from our training in the way we do because we have a set of dispositions or tendencies that happen to be activated in this way by the examples used in training. 

As well as the biological instinct account of our spontaneous responses, Wittgenstein also resorted to mechanical analogies. He likened the rule follower to a piece of machinery. This is apt for explaining how a rule follower can go on from a finite number of examples, because mechanical systems have properties such as momentum and inertia. They can also contain parts which rotate or cycle around and repeat themselves. Once they are set in motion they continue to go further along the same path, or repeat again what they did in the past. This makes them obvious models for the repetitive processes that often attend rule following, especially of the number sequence variety. A person taught to produce such a sequence will often do so automatically, grinding out the numbers in a machine-like way.

We can now see why Wittgenstein posed his question about the utility of saying the correct steps of a rule are somehow laid out in advance. For him the supposition was unnecessary. If we respond automatically and instinctively, we don't need to know in advance.

The idea that the correctness of the answer 2006 was determined earlier on is rejected. It's superfluous. So it was not determined earlier on. If it is determined at all, it is determined at the moment the step is made.

So far the account has said nothing about whether the move to the next putative instance of a rule or concept is right or wrong. Saying pupils extend their training in ways that seem natural to them does not address the mystery of normativity. Suppose a number of would-be rule followers were trained to count in twos and when they followed their instincts they found they diverged from one another. We want to say that somebody was making a mistake, but what is the criterion by which this is a mistake?

If the notions of right and wrong cannot be explained by the mechanisms within each individual leading them spontaneously from case to case, what can explain them? Wittgenstein's answer was that these normative ideas are bounded by 'the role of thinking and inferring in our life'. He meant that a tacit consensus of action determines what is counted as right and wrong. Making a step in following a rule counts as a right step if it is aligned with the steps everyone else takes. 

To make a wrong move is ultimately to make a move that leads the individual along a divergent path. To be wrong is to be deviant. The normative property of rules do not derive from instinctive sources of individual activity, but from the alignment of these different sources in the majority of cases, what Wittgenstein called the 'agreement of ratifications'

Wittgenstein sometimes said that consensus is a precondition of rule following activities. Because consensus is integral to following mathematical rules we can use these rules to make predictions about how rule followers are likely to behave. If I ask you to multiply 25 by 25 I could predict you will say 625. Calculating is founded on such predictions.

Our concern with the consensual aspects of rules is normative and evaluative. If our prediction comes out wrong, we do not call the theory on which the prediction is based into question. Rather we put the competence of the rule follower in doubt. The involvement of consensus at some point in the story was predictable from the start: it was implicit in the focus on teaching and learning. Teachers are the agents of the social collective who are charged with the task of transmitting its culture to new members.

The argument may be summarized like this: In following a rule we move automatically from case to case, guided by our instinctive but socially educated sense of 'sameness'. Such a sense does not itself suffice to create a standard of right and wrong. It is necessary to introduce a sociological element into the account to explain normativity. Normative standards come from the consensus generated by a number of interacting rule followers, and it is maintained by collectively monitoring, controlling, and sanctioning their individual tendencies. Consensus makes norms objective, that is, a source of external and impersonal constraint on the individual. It gives substance to the distinction between rule followers thinking they've got it right and having really got it right. 

One idea that often features in accounts of rule following is 'interpretation'. A certain interpretation is put on the rule, and this interpretation is supposed to determine the response. The interpretation compels or guides the rule follower. What is an interpretation? One set of signs is replaced by another set of signs, under the constraint that the meaning of the second set is the same as the meaning of the first. Interpretation is not a process that generates meaning: it is a transformation that takes the notion of meaning granted. The source of meaning cannot be interpretation itself. This creates a problem if we say we follow a rule by interpreting it, or if we say every act of rule following involves our interpreting it. This can sometimes be true. It cannot always be true because the process of interpretation itself will have the character of an act of rule following. After the interpretation we will be left with a set of symbols to which we must respond, i.e. upon which we must act.

Disastrous consequences follow from insisting that an act of interpretation always mediates a step in rule following. If to understand a rule I must interpret it, then I must interpret the interpretation. If meaning is not something independent of interpretation, and a standard against which it is measured, then there is nothing to constrain the interpretation.

Wittgenstein says: "However many rules you give me - I give a rule, which justifies my employment of your rules."

Wittgenstein accepts that whatever we do can be interpreted as following a given rule, and that 'anything can be somehow justified'. This result confronts us with a choice: either there is no determinate phenomenon of the kind we call rule following, or interpretation plays no ultimate role in it. Wittgenstein opts for the latter conclusion.

According to meaning finitism, we create meaning as we move from case to case. We could take our concepts or rules anywhere, in any direction, and count anything as a new member of an old class, or of the same kind as some existing finite set of past cases. We are not prevented by 'logic' or by 'meanings' from doing this. The real sources of constraint preventing our going anywhere and everywhere are the local circumstances impinging upon us: our instincts, our biological nature, our interactions with other people, our training, our anticipation of and response to sanctions, and so on, starting with the psychological and ending with the sociological. This is the message of Wittgenstein's meaning finitism.

The finitist picture of rule following isn't confined to special cases, it's meant to apply everywhere, including places such as mathematics.

The most obvious feature of this picture is its wholly down-to-earth character. It is this-worldly, concrete and causal: in a word, naturalistic. Wittgenstein insisted he was talking about language as a spatial and temporal phenomenon, not some abstract phantasm outside space and time. One potent source of such phantasms is meaning determinism.

What is the attraction of these non-finitist theories in which the mind allegedly grasps the content of ideas which lay out in advance the right and wrong applications of the concept? Where do we get the idea that a rule has some manner of independent existence and that following a rule is like tracing out a line that is already there? This isn't just a naive picture people grow out of as they become more intellectually sophisticated: It has also gripped philosophers like Frege.

Wittgenstein's hypothesis was that we are prone to accept this picture because of the strong drill and rigorous training necessary if we are to master rules, especially mathematical ones. We feel there is an inexorability about the progression of rules such as the number sequence, because of the inexorability with which we are socialized into the practice. The emphatic 'must' corresponds to our collective attitude towards the rule. The process of training is so rigorous because of its centrality and importance in our lives.

The things we feel inclined to say about rules, or the pictures that come into our heads when we reflect on them, are not genuine insights into rules or data about them. They are just the psychological side-effects of social causes, and as such, they should be seen merely as material for explanation.

Thus the mysterious aspect of rules are dismissed as myths, but myths arising from our failure to bring our experience of social processes and pressures into focus. The claim is that when we find our rule following to be smooth and mechanical we project that feeling on the rule itself.

Rules and meanings considered in themselves do not possess any agency: all agency and action associated with them derives from their human users and creators. Yet we constantly speak as if we are compelled by some reality outside ourselves. This is not pure error and illusion, each of us individually is compelled by something outside, namely by other people around us in society. It is society that is external to us and the true source of our sense that rules exist as an independent reality set over against the individual rule follower.

We've discussed only one of the two mysterious aspects of rules, namely the mystery of normativity. What about the mystery of infinity? How can a rule generate, say, an infinite sequence of numbers? How is meaning finitism to be reconciled with our grasp of 'infinity'? On the one hand we feel inclined to say the finite mind surely cannot grasp the infinite. On the other hand, we do seem to grasp the infinite. Wittgenstein sustains the finitist position by treating 'infinity' as something negative rather than positive. Infinity is a merely the lack of any specified limit or end. Things are left open by virtue of their not possessing certain properties rather than by their being heavily weighed down.

For example, we might say the playing field for a certain game is unlimited, and mean merely that the rules of the game do not prescribe any boundaries. The situation might be likened to having permission to do something, with nothing being said about stopping.

If we examine rules for generating the sequence of even numbers, all we find on the page are a few words or a few signs. Looking at the words or signs, we see something perfectly concrete, delimited, and finitely graspable. We don't discover anything on the page 'infinite'.

The important condition to be satisfied, and the crucial insight, is that the word 'infinite' must get its meaning from our finite, rule-following activities. Infinity isn't something having an independent meaning we somehow intuit and then bring to these activities as a specification they must fulfill. The finitist meaning of the word 'infinity' comes from its use, not its use from its non-finitistically given 'meaning;

One of the most basic concepts used in philosophical semantics is that of the 'extension' of a term. The extension of 'swan' is the class of all things correctly called swans. It's usually noted the extension of a term is not to be equated with its meaning, because two terms with the same extension might have different meanings. Nevertheless the meaning of a term is said to fix the extension. Once the meaning is given the class of things within its extension has been predetermined.

For a finitist there is no such thing as the 'extension' of a term or concept, or if the word 'extension' is used, it radically changes its significance. Without extensions of the traditional kind, however, we no longer have propositions with a determinate content. There is no class of things existing in advance of the application of a label.

The claim is that 'extensions' as philosophers have characterized them, don't exist. When philosophers think of the 'extension' of a term they think of an envelope surrounding a set of objects. They are simply fictions generated by philosophical theory. Following Wittgenstein, the finitist will reply that it isn't true: an enclosure with a hole in it can be perfectly serviceable for some purposes, when talking about concepts and meanings the metaphor of enclosure is not appropriate.

From a finitist perspective it makes sense to say our beliefs are never determinate or fully specifiable, at least not in the way many philosophical theories assume. Nor are our intentions every fully specified with respect to circumstances that might be counted as fulfilling or frustrating them.

We can never know or state exactly what we believe or what we intend. We do not, and cannot, plan in advance for all contingencies, and yet in practice we never feel this fact as a lack. In this respect Wittgenstein surely intended his famous discussion of the concept 'game' to be fully representative.

> For how is the concept of a game bounded? What still counts as a game and what no longer does? Can you give the boundary? No. You can *draw* one; for none has so far been drawn. (But that never troubled you before when you used the word 'game'.)

Wittgenstein isn't saying the word 'game' is defective or that we can't construct such expressions as 'all games' or 'the class of games'. He is saying that when we invoke them an irreparable indeterminacy hovers around their employment. Likewise for our everyday and scientific employment of class and kind terms. We do and can talk about kinds of things. Such talk does not refute finitism, but it must be analyzed finitistically. The same applies for the boundary that can be drawn around games or the class of numbers. We could say: these, and only these, are truly games or numbers, and lay down a set of specifications. But the concepts employed in the specification would themselves be subject to an inherent indeterminacy. This is what links Wittgenstein's discussion of the vagueness and open-texture of concepts such as 'game' or 'number' with his finitism. Cases of vagueness which we once lived with, and of which we may have been wholly unaware, can act as reminders that an enclosure with a hole in it is not without its uses.

The thesis that all enclosures always have 'holes' in them, by tradition philosophical standards, then looks less like a non-starter. There is a developing thread of argument running through the *Investigations* which gradually introduces these themes and carries us from the easily accepted phenomenon of open-texture to the radical thesis of finitism.

Wittgenstein's aim was to make us aware that we simply do not address the question of what we should say, or how we should apply or withhold a class or kind word, if objects behaved in the ways that we did not expect or anticipate. These are open questions. What is more, they are just as much open questions for the social collective as for the individual. Finitism doesn't imply that if you examine individual thoughts you will find meaning is indeterminate, but if you bring in the community this indeterminacy is removed or corrected. It can never be removed. Consensus may furnish us with norms, but it does not overcome finitism. Nothing can overcome finitism.