Say we can see afterwards how well-off a nation has been, how can we see beforehand which policies speculators expect to make that nation better off? The trick is to use markets whose prices can be interpreted as decision-conditional estimates.

Consider bets on the event D, that is, the Democratic Party wins the 2016 US presidential election. A financial firm could without risk accept $1 in payment for the pair of contingent assets, "Pays $1 if D" and "Pays $1 if not D". This transaction carries no financial risk because exactly one of this pair will be worth $1 in the end.

The expected dollar value of the asset "Pays $1 if D" is $p(D), that is, the probability of the event D. So if someone is willing to buy this asset for $0.60, we can interpret this roughly as their saying the chance the Democrats will win is at least 60%. And a market price of $0.60 can be interpreted as a consensus among traders that p(D) approximately equals 60%. After averaging in their minds over plausible scenarios, traders would have judged that Democrats win in about 60% of such scenarios.

Now, imagine a market like the one above, where people can trade an asset like "Pays $1 if D" for some fraction of $1, but where such trades are called off unless there is also the event H, that is, Hillary Clinton is the nominee of the Democratic Party in the 2016 US presidential election. When a trade is called off, the exchange doesn't happen, and each side instead retains their original assets. Traders thinking about the prices they are willing to accept here should again average over plausible scenarios, but now only considering scenarios consistent with the event H, that Clinton is the nominee.

A market price of $0.70 here can be interpreted as a consensus that about 70% of these scenarios have the Democrats winning. This would be a consensus that p(D|H) approximately equals 70%, that is, the conditional probability of the Democrats winning given that Hillary Clinton is the Democratic nominee is 70%.

Speculative markets can estimate not only probabilities, but also expected values. Let $x$ denote the democratic Party's fraction of the total vote in the presidential election. If a bank accepts $1 in payment for the pair "Pays $x" and "Pays $1-x", then the fraction of $1 required in trade for the asset "Pays $x" can be interpreted as a market estimate of the expected value E\[x\] . Similarly, the fraction of the asset "Pays $1 if H" traded for the asset "Pays $x if H" can be interpreted as a market estimate of the conditional expectation E\[x|H\].  Since 1996, the Iowa Electronic Markets have actually had markets with prices describing each party’s expected vote fraction conditional on various possible party nominees.

Similarly, if national welfare W is a measure normalized to be between zero and one, then we can create speculative markets to estimate whether a policy N is an improvement over status quo policy Q. Markets trading "Pays $W if N" for some fraction of "Pays $1 if N" give estimates of E\[W|N\]. Just as people considering what fraction of $1 to pay for "Pays $W" will try to average W values across all plausible scenarios.

Standard decision theory says to take the action associated with the highest action-conditional expected utility. When the decision market estimate of E\[W|N\] is clearly greater than its estimate of E\[W|Q\], speculators are saying they expect more national welfare, given this new policy. In this case, standard decision theory recommends that, if you were in a position of power to make the choice, you should choose this new policy N if what you wanted was national welfare, and if the decision market prices matched your beliefs.