While government policy may often suffer info failures, speculative markets show striking info successes.

Most markets for stocks, bonds, currency, and commodities futures are called speculative markets because they let people speculate on future prices by buying or selling today in the hope of reversing their trades later for profit. Such opportunities occur when identical durable items are traded frequently in a market with low transaction consts.

Betting markets are speculative markets trading assets designed to let people speculate on particular matters of fact. Final bet asset values are defined in terms of later official judgments about the facts in question. By construction such assets are durable, identical, and can be created in unlimited supply.

Betting and other speculative markets have been around for centuries, and for decades academics studied their info properties. The main robust and consistent finding is that it's usually quite hard, though not impossible, to find info not yet incorporated in speculative market prices. In laboratory experiments, speculative markets usually aggregate info well, even with four ignorant traders trading $4 over four minutes.

There are noteworthy exceptions. Betting markets typically overestimate low probability, or "long shot", events, though with low transaction costs specialists usually eliminate this bias.  Also with complex trader info, "info traps" can arise where traders lack info revelation incentives. Such traps can be avoided by trading in more kinds of related assets.

Financial markets also seem to have excess long-term aggregate price variation, such as financial market bubbles. Though bubbles can be hard to distinguish from rational info responses. Risk and delay discourage specialists from correcting such errors and so irrationally risky traders can actually get better returns, if not utility, and so are not selected out. But, even if speculative markets are distorted by irrational bubbles, no known info institution does better. For example, what other info institution consistently and clearly predicted that we were over-investing during the dotcom or housing bubbles? Yes individual academics or reported predicted it, but so did individual stock investors.

The key issue is not absolute accuracy, but accuracy relative to other institutions, on the same topics, given similar resources. In addition to lab studies, a few studies directly compare real speculative markets with other real info institutions. For example, racetrack market odds improve on the prediction of racetrack experts; orange juice commodity futures improve on government weather forecasts; stocks fingered the guilty firm in the Challenger crash long before the official NASA
panel; Oscar markets beat columnist forecasts; gas demand markets beat gas demand experts; betting markets beat Hewlett Packard official printer sale forecasts; and betting markets beat Eli Lily official drug trial forecasts.

The largest known tests compare bet prices to major opinion polls on US presidential elections. For example, in 709 out of 964 comparisons, bet prices were closer to the final result. This gain comes in part from prices being disproportionately influenced by active traders, who suffer less from cognitive biases.

Some might argue that statistical models built from poll data predict past elections better than betting prices did, and could have been used to win bets. If we compare apples to apples, statistical models built from bet prices predict better than statistical models built from polls. Importantly, one group's statistical model on one topic is not a general *institution* to which we could return time and time again for answers on many disputed policy topics.

The claim isn't that betting prices are always more accurate than other sources, but that they're a robustly accurate public institution estimating policy-relevant topics. When supported by similar resources and compared on the same topic, they're often substantially better, and only rarely substantially worse, than other info institutions with publicly visible estimates. 

The claim has little to do with any "wisdom of crowds". Speculators tend to rely more on crowds when crowds know more, and on experts when experts know more. 

The main reasons for superior speculative market accuracy seem to be incentive and selection effects: stronger accuracy incentives tend to reduce cognitive bias, those who think they know more tend to trade more, and specialists are paid to eliminate any biases they can find. These attempted explanations are not the main reason to believe in speculative market accuracy. The main reason is the robust and consistent empirical track record.

We want policy-related info institutions to resit manipulation, that is, to resist attempts to influence policy via distorted participation. Speculative markets do well here because they deal well with "noise trading", that is, trading for reasons other than info about common asset values. When other traders can't predict noise trading exactly, they compensate for its expected average by an opposite average trade, and compensate for its expected variation by trading more, and by working harder to find relevant info. Theory says that if trader risk-aversion is mild, and if more effort gives more info, then increased noise trading increases price accuracy. In fact, the most accurate real speculative markets tend to be those with the *most* noise trading.

What do noise traders have to do with manipulators? Manipulators, who trade hoping to distort prices, *are* noise traders, since they trade for reasons other than asset value info. Thus adding manipulators to speculative markets doesn't reduce average price accuracy. This has been verified in theory, in laboratory experiments, and in the field.