In the preface to the *Critique* Kant observes that although metaphysics is meant to be 'the Queen of all sciences' no participant has ever yet succeeded in gaining even so much as an inch of territory in disagreements concerning metaphysics.

The instability of metaphysics stands in contrast to the security of mathematics and natural science, and leaves us with no choice but to conclude that metaphysics 'has hitherto been a merely random groping'.

# Historical Background: The Enlightenment and its Problems
---
The feature of Kant's philosophy most strongly emphasized in synoptic histories of philosophy is its synthetic relation to the two mighty traditions of rationalism and empiricism. Specifically, to the philosophies of Leibniz and Hume.

Overcoming opposition of rationalism and empiricism is a subsidiary theme in Kant's philosophy: primarily, it's a response to the deep problems bound up with the project of Enlightenment.

With qualification, it may be said that the Enlightenment received its chief inspiration from the successes of the scientific revolution of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, and was concerned with defending what Western thought now takes for granted: the right of each to make up his own mind on matters of theoretical or practical substance, in place of appeal to established authority or tradition.

From Intellectual emancipation, political emancipation would follow. Enlightenment is, as Kant put it an essay which attempts to define the notion, '*man's emergence from his self-incurred immaturity*'; its motto is '*Sapre aude!*'. The programme dictated by this outlook consisted in submitting all received wisdom and existing practice to the scrutiny of reason.

In Germany the Enlightenment tool hold relatively late. The representative philosophy was that of Leibniz, as propagated by Christian Wolff and his followers. Wolff had recast Leibniz's philosophy in an explicitly systematic form, and in the first half of the eighteenth century the 'Leibniz-Wolffian philosophy' became standard fare in German universities. It had its critics, but had no rival of comparable stature until Kant's Critical philosophy burst upon the scene late in the century. By then the prestige of Enlightenment had been tarnished.

The favored Enlightenment solution to the question of how knowledge of nature and knowledge of God were to be coordinates was natural theology, which exalted the order of nature, in place of revelation, as proof of God's existence, making reason the foundation of religion. Natural theology was not ultimately satisfactory, since it effectively disposed of biblical authority, and the deism which it supported was too austere for the demands of a living faith.

The tension between the demands of religion and those of natural science was one of several that crystallized in the 'Leibniz-Clarke correspondence'. The protagonists in this important dispute were Leibniz and Newton, for whom Samuel Clarke acted as a spokesman. Each advocated a different mod of theorizing about nature: Leibniz employed a deductive method and modelled on mathematics, which began with abstract general notions and worked down to concrete nature; Newton by contrast ascended from quantitative measurement of the phenomena to first principles.

Leibniz attacked, as incompatible with theology and the principle of sufficient reason, certain key Newtonian tenets regarding space and time and other matters; Clarke defended them, both on scientific grounds and with regard to their theological compatibility. The upshot was the on numerous fundamental points Leibniz's reasoning form the PSR arrived at conclusions about the structure of reality diametrically opposed to those to which Newton had been led by his 'deduction from of the phenomena'.

This situation was deeply worrying, not only because the inability to reach agreement might obscure the self-evidence of the authority claimed by the new scientific knowledge: the fact that natural science and metaphysics, both of which claimed to be rational descriptions of reality, should contradict one another amounted to sheer paradox and meant that the autonomous exercise of reason in scientific researched posed a threat to rational religion. Metaphysics has found itself compromised.

The most powerful onslaught on the dogmas of the age was, of course, Hume's skeptical empiricism. Reason had been intimately associated with nature. Hume disunited them, to the disadvantage of reason. Beliefs about the external world have no foundation in reason and repose entirely on 'habit' and 'custom'. The non-rational support that nature provides for our beliefs is available only for those that concern matters of experience. Religious belief, and the whole edifice of metaphysical speculation, have no ground whatsoever: every volume 'of divinity or school metaphysics' we should commit 'to the flames', 'for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion'. Hume demanded a reply.

There is also the voices of those comprising what has been called the Counter-Enlightenment. The three main names associated with the Counter-Enlightenment in Germany are Hamann, Herder, and Jacobi.

Hamann and Jacobi both strove to defend what reason is too limited to grasp: what the Enlightenment condemned as valueless because contrary to reason, they regarded as a regulation of reason's claim to supremacy.

For Jacobi, this meant the power of feelings that reveals directly the God of theism; for Hamann, it mean poetry, genius and divine revelation through Christian scripture and the particulars of language and history. By taking side with the victims of reason' hegemony, the committed themselves to outright anti-intellectualism, if not irrationalism; they were described as 'philosophers of faith or feeling'.

Herder, though influenced by Hamann, was more moderate and offered an intellectual alternative to the Enlightenment: a naturalistic and historicist picture of man that repudiated the autonomy of reason and affirmed its dependence on particular concrete forms of embodiment, above all language.

The Counter-Enlightenment drew inspiration in part form a force outside philosophy, Pietism. An evangelical Lutheran movement that originated in Germany as a reaction against Protestant dogmatism. The movement provided a constant source of resistance to Enlightenment (the arch-rationalist Wolff was temporarily banished from Prussia as a result of charges of godlessness levelled at him by his Pietist colleagues). Hamman, Herder, and Jacobi were deeply influenced by Pietism. Kant was brought up in Pietism.

The conflict between Enlightenment and its detractors exploded in Germany after the death of Lessing, with the pantheism controversy. Initially it consisted of a heated epistolary exchange between polemical Jacobi and Moses Mendelssohn, a rationalist philosophy. Subsequent to Jacobi's publication of the relevant documents, a public quarrel ensued, into which many others, including Kant, were dragged. Superficially, the topic of dispute was the factual question of whether Lessing had secretly been a 'Spinozist' meaning an atheist and fatalist. The real question was the philosophical one of where reason stood on the subject of religion: Mendelssohn maintained the orthodox Enlightenment position that reason supports faith; Jacobi held that unbridled exercise of reason necessarily terminates in the faithlessness represented by Spinoza's pantheism.

Nature itself seemed to put a question to proponents of Enlightenment. in 1755 an earthquake devastated Lisbon. This event appeared to flatly contradict Enlightenment assumption of the rational purposiveness of nature ramified spiritually throughout Europe, and added fuel to the debate that existed concerning Leibniz's theodicy, his claim that this is the best of all possible worlds.

These issues pervaded the intellectual world in habited by Kant. Kant thus witnessed and participated in the process by which the Enlightenment made itself ready for a new development. Kant's achievement was to create a philosophy of Enlightenment in its maturity that took account of the difficulties confronting it, and brought it to a culmination. Enlightenment was no to survive in an overt form as a unified and dominant cultural force; romanticism took its place in cultural history. But Kant provided it with a definitive articulation and equipped it with the strongest possible defense.